12/5/22, 12:38 PM If farmer quits, FrieslandCampina can expand its factory - NRC
9 e
 
san that elements are missing from this print version.
If farmer quits, can
FrieslandCampina can expand its
factory to expand
Nitrogen emissions How do you expand a factory in a region with
heavy nitrogen load? FrieslandCampina bought emission rights
from fifteen farmers.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/18/als-de-boer-stopt-kan-frieslandcampina-uitbreiden-a4145588 1/5
 12/5/22, 12:38 PM If farmer stops, FrieslandCampina can expand its factory - NRC
Through intermediaries, FrieslandCampina bought 27 tons of emission rights from fifteen farmers in North
Brabant. This is allowed by law, but has also been criticized.
Photo Koen van Weel/ANP ta
This is how he never expected to do business with FrieslandCampina. Lambertus
de Bruin (60), a dairy farmer, had been a member of the dairy cooperative for years and knew it
well. But that in addition to milk he would one day sell his "nitrogen space" to the concern,
he had not anticipated. "We carry them warmly, so in that respect it is not
bad."
FrieslandCampina announced this month that it had accumulated enough nitrogen space
to expand its dairy plant in Veghel, Brabant.
To do so, the company bought, through intermediaries, 27 tons of emission space from fifteen
farmers, who are quitting their businesses in various corners of the province.
The transaction is a remarkable example of the lively trade in nitrogen rights.
That FrieslandCampina found the needed nitrogen space required complex
calculations and months of sleuthing to find suitable farms. In doing so
to the meter which nature areas would suffer from the new plant's emissions.
emissions from the new plant.
The agreement between company and farmers is in order according to the law, but the practice of
nitrogen trading can count on resistance. The agricultural world fears shrinkage,
as nitrogen space flows to other industries. And experts fear that in
the current, tight nitrogen market, mainly parties with money can realize projects.
They are also critical that, while nitrogen emissions are still far too high, the space of
quitting companies is being reused.
The agricultural world fears shrinkage, because nitrogen space
flows to other industries
How much FrieslandCampina paid the farmers, it would not say. On websites such as
ammoniakrechten.nl intermediaries offer nitrogen space for 5 to 500 euros per
kilo. Prices vary by region. The closer to a vulnerable nature reserve, the
higher the price.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/18/als-de-boer-stopt-kan-frieslandcampina-uitbreiden-a4145588 2/5
 12/5/22, 12:38 PM If farmer quits, FrieslandCampina can expand its factory - NRC
For De Bruin, who has since gotten rid of his cows and is focusing on arable farming (at
the same spot in Reek, Brabant), yields are disappointing. Laughs: "I can buy a new car
buy a new car, but it is of little use in terms of investment in my new arable farm.
After decades among the cows, it was time for a "slightly less strenuous" profession, he says.
less strenuous" occupation, he says.
Affected region
The plant FrieslandCampina is expanding makes medical nutrition based on
caseinates: proteins from fresh milk. Demand for it is rising worldwide, the
dairy company. But the expansion also increases the plant's nitrogen emissions.
Developing new business activities in southeastern North Brabant is anyway
complicated. The region is one of the most nitrogen-affected areas of
Netherlands, particularly due to the many pig farms - accounting for some five million
pigs. And that while the province must halve its nitrogen emissions by 2030
by 2030 from the national government.
Looking for a solution, FrieslandCampina approached agricultural consultancy DLV more than eighteen months
a year and a half ago, FrieslandCampina approached agricultural consultancy DLV Advies. This links sellers of nitrogen space
to parties seeking this space. Farmers regularly report to DLV Advies who are
considering stopping, who want to stop or who have recently ended their business and
hope to make some money by selling their nitrogen rights.
Jacob Sleutels (54) from Heusden, municipality of Asten, has now retired as a dairy farmer
stopped and only wants to keep some horses. The dairy farm that he ran as the third
generation, could no longer manage with ninety cows. The expansion of the nearby
nature reserve would force him to keep even fewer cows. Therefore
he got rid of the animals. "They have been gone for two years now, and I still miss them every day" His
nitrogen space he sold to FrieslandCampina.
Read more about nitrogen rights trading:
For sale: farmers offer thousands of kilos of
nitrogen space for sale
Matching the demand for nitrogen space and its supply is complicated.
Expansion of the FrieslandCampina plant would create "nitrogen emissions to all
wind directions," says Jos de Groot, who at DLV Advies handles the deals
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/18/als-de-boer-stopt-kan-frieslandcampina-uitbreiden-a4145588 3/5
 12/5/22, 12:38 PM If farmer quits, FrieslandCampina can expand factory - NRC
arranged with the farmers. This required a lot of puzzling. Where are suitable farmers,
where do their emissions fall?
Striking: De Groot advised FrieslandCampina to buy more space than theoretically
required. This is because the jurisprudence surrounding nitrogen trading is constantly changing and is
extremely complex; the legislation is the subject of several lawsuits. Possibly
It is possible that a rule will soon be struck down in court that requires account to be
nitrogen deposited further than 25 kilometers from the emitter. That is why
FrieslandCampina bought extra space. De Groot: "We said: it is good to play it safe.
safe"
ede
Some make easy money with this business. That
Doesn't make reducing emissions any easier
Vulnerable nature
The nitrogen trade in which FrieslandCampina participated is the only way for
companies to expand in areas with high nitrogen loads. But there is also
another side to it, NRC wrote earlier.
Retiring farmers sell rights that they usually got for free when they applied for their
permit. Those who are now in an area with high demand for those rights are
bacon buyer. Experts find it legally questionable that the released space
does not go to sensitive wildlife.
"It is clear that some people make easy money from this trade. That does not make
reduce emissions no easier," says Raoul Beunen, university
senior lecturer at the Open University and an expert in nitrogen policy. According to him, you can
also read the law in such a way that all released nitrogen space must go to nature, as long as
it is in poor condition.
Beunen points out that in theory the precipitation of nitrogen on natural areas can also
increase. For example, at some farms from which space is being taken over, the
cows have been gone for some time. And then there is the chance that parties with the deepest pockets will get away
run off with the nitrogen space.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/18/als-de-boer-stopt-kan-frieslandcampina-uitbreiden-a4145588 4/5
 12/5/22, 12:38 PM If farmer quits, FrieslandCampina can expand its factory - NRC
In the agricultural sector, the "loss" of nitrogen space to other sectors is sensitive.
Mark van den Oever, foreman of the militant farmers' group Farmers Defence Force,
already called farmers who sell nitrogen space to other sectors "Judases" and
"weak links."
According to Jos de Groot of DLV Advies, the idea that the "deepest pockets" win does not
entirely true. "I currently have more supply of nitrogen than demand," he said.
According to FrieslandCampina, buying up nitrogen rights "comes into the picture as an option only
in the picture when there are no other options left". The company points out that only
use of rights "already offered on the market by
farmers". "Obviously, we want to structurally reduce the ammonia emissions released during this production
reduce structurally. But it takes several years to determine the best solution for this
determine and implement it"
A version of this article also appeared in the October 19, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/18/als-de-boer-stopt-kan-frieslandcampina-uitbreiden-a4145588 5/5

