= Menu nrc) WD Mining News f} Podcasts [Sj Digital newspaper Q
REPORTAGE
Belgian blockades also draw Dutch farmers
to Hazeldonk: beer, sandwiches and burning
car tires
Border blockade Dutch farmers joined the Belgian blockades on Friday with their tractors
at the border. "Industry is allowed to emit much more nitrogen than farmers. That's not right"
Arjen Schreuder 2february2024 Reading time 3 minutes
Listening cd) Reading list U
 Belgian measures
The parliament, explains action leader Jelle Pauwels, last week adopted a "nitrogen decree"
that is "based on erroneous and deliberately fabricated figures" and makes it "virtually impossible" for farmers
 to expand their businesses. Pauwels (39) lives in the Flemish village of Vlimmeren and runs
a contracting company. Pauwels: "Mathematical models are used that are known to have 70
percent deviation on them."
Photo Merlin Daleman
farmers have to get out of there."
 The action to block the border in three places at the same time is well coordinated, he says,
by the Flemish branch of the Dutch action group Farmers Defense Force (FDF), of which he is
vice president. Around midnight, he says, there were five hundred Flemish tractors on
the A16, with a thousand participating activists. People wanted to stay as long as possible.
Sleep-deprived farmers
Sympathy abounds for the Flemish farmers. Such as from Jan Donckers (68) from Flemish Meer, just
across the border. He climbed on his bike after seeing many swerve trucks early this morning on a narrow road where he
lives, saw a lot of swerve trucks. Donckers: "Industry is allowed to emit much more nitrogen
emissions than the farmers. That's not right. The port of Antwerp is everything to Flanders and the
farmers just have to sweat out the pain. That's wrong. There will have to be fewer emissions, but
not this way."
The leader of FDF in the Netherlands, Mark van den Oever, made his appearance on Friday just down the road,
at the blockade of the A67 highway in East Brabant. On the phone, he says that the farmers' actions in
abroad are "motivating" the Dutch. "Many farmers here are a bit asleep
dormant, but we are going to do more action again." Especially against measures that the current cabinet
despite its outgoing state are still taking, according to him. "Those are going to cost a farm 50,000 euros in
a year." There are also plans to march with many farmers from different countries to Brussels
steaming up, on June 4, two days before the European elections. "That's where we're going to make ourselves heard."
Read also
During the farmers' protest in Arnhem, the farmers' main concern is the
signal
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 3, 2024 newspaper.
Share "6 Mail the editor
BELGIUM
Grim atmosphere at farmers' protests in Brussels
)6 February 202
 Driver in Ghent kills two cyclists
February 25, 2024
NRC Websites
My NRC
About NRC
Contact
nrc)
NRC Media House
Subscribe
Editorial team
About us
Working At
Opinion editorial
NRC Careers
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
Create Account
The Ombudsman
Digital newspaper
NRC Readers Fund
Privacy
Colophon
Delivery conditions
My reading list
AdSales
My subscriptions
Customer service
NRC Code
Family Reports
Service & delivery
Our app
Newsletters
Archive
Advertising
NY
f © DH
 

