= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
BACKGROUND
Hardly anyone wants to talk about
nitrogen and 2030, including Frans Timmermans
not
Nitrogen The GroenLinks-PvdA list leader no longer wants to commit to a
year to halve nitrogen. It is sensitive among supporters, but with
nitrogen targets will not win you any votes.
Eppo König, Philip de Witt Wijnen 7november2023 Reading time 3 minutes
Listening d) Reading List A
 1 LE VV, 1st who ep We
ermans tij de s a Camnpagne-evV. En tin the Oosterpoort, Groningen.
wanted to tinker with the nitrogen diets
 
and. Stick to
 
nde and Ae SpIddK O e p 9
Photo Siese Veenstra / ANP
 cabinet about this in political trouble: in August 2022 and this spring after the
Provincial Council elections.
Six months later, at election time, it is precisely list leader Frans
Timmermans of the combined GroenLinks-PvdA list does exactly the thing
with which former CDA leader Wopke Hoekstra undermined government policy.
government policy. For Timmermans, too, the "nitrogen deadline" 2030 is no longer sacrosanct.
Both in last Sunday's RTL election debate and in the one-on-one
debate with Pieter Omtzigt in Arnhem, Timmermans distanced himself from his own
election program. This states, "We will stick to the goal of reducing
nitrogen emissions by half by 2030."
Don't miss anything about politics?
Subscribe
sign up for a political package and receive all the news via
 
a newsletter, podcast and follow topics.
Timmermans believes it is more important, he said on TV Sunday night, to "come out with
young farmers to come out together" than to "stick exactly to what we agreed on in the
election program". A week earlier he declared himself
on the nitrogen targets "not to commit to a year."
 Remarkable turn
It is a remarkable turn for the "united left" that, particularly from
Green Left, wanted to keep the Rutte cabinets on track with nature and the environment.
keep. Although GroenLinks MP Laura Bromet sees it differently. She was Sunday
present he debate and there heard "the diplomat in Timmermans." "He
wanted to indicate that if you want to overcome the polarization on this issue, the
reciting your election programrmna not get you much further. Our goals
for nature restoration simply stand," she says.
Within GroenLinks there is also criticism of Timmermans' easing of the
nitrogen position, although not everyone wants to do so openly in campaign time.
Roshano Dewnarain, group chairman in the city council of Central
Groningen, calls it "absolutely not a convenient action" by Timmermans. "In
principle, everyone must adhere to the election program, including the
list leader, although there may be some leeway in the debate."
Hagar Roijackers, deputy for Nature in the province of North Brabant, thinks that
"the anchor of a date remains necessary," but that "for the necessary
nature protection at the same time is not about the date, It's about the choices
you make to achieve reduction and the resources you are willing to
put in."
Other parties who advocate a strict nitrogen policy find it a lame
story of Timmermans.
 Member of Parliament Tjeerd de Groot of D66: "Nature and the climate are not waiting for political parties to fulfil their green ideals.
waiting for political parties to sell off their green ideals." He
finds it particularly painful for GroenLinks. "That was my ally for a long time."
Read also
How will the Netherlands get out of the nitrogen crisis? 1 P
'£
Agreeable reactions
From parties who have long wanted to tone down nitrogen policy, Timmermans received
approving reactions. "I think it is sincerely good when politicians dare to change their opinion.
change their minds," tweeted CDA list leader Henri Bontenbal, for example. "I still have
a few more suggestions, Frans."
"Moralizing deadlines," as Timmermans is doing, is bad news for the
nature, says Hank Bartelink of LandschappenNL, one of the parties that helped
negotiated the botched Agriculture Agreement. "Any postponement of
recovery measures not only means further degradation of nature ,
but also leads to further increases in restoration costs."
But major consequences for nitrogen policy will be the abandonment of 2030 by
GroenLinks-PvdA is unlikely to have any. After all, Timmermans is not
exactly the first with it. The outgoing cabinet may not have formally
distanced itself from 2030, but in fact it has. The coalition parties VVD, CDA and
 Christian Union do not have 2030 as a target year in their election program
- only D66 still has it.
On the right flank, opposition parties PVV, BBB, JA21, SGP, Forum voor
Democracy and BVNL 2030 never supported it. On the left, the Party for
Animals that wants not 50, but at least 70 percent less nitrogen emissions in 2030
than in 2020.
GroenLinks in particular wanted the cabinets around nature and
environment precisely to keep them on their toes.
Actually, the whole nitrogen approach is back to square one since the fall of the cabinet. The
speed limit has been lowered from 130 to 100 kilometers per hour in order to achieve cleaner
driving. There is a voluntary buyout scheme for large emitters, the peak emitters.
But the ambitious Rutte IV cabinet has not come much further than that to
tackle nitrogen. A new cabinet will have to adopt a new nitrogen policy
adopted, also to restart construction permitting.
About such a new policy you only hear surprisingly little this campaign, because
nitrogen targets don't draw votes. New Social Contract (NSC) claims to have a
new nitrogen policy - although you see some views reflected in
other parties. Pieter Omtzigt's party wants to halve nitrogen emissions
 by 2035, as stated in the law. A policy focused on fewer emissions rather than
on the deposition of nitrogen. More room for farmers to arrange how to pollute less.
NSC also stresses that we need to look more closely at the real state of nature in our policy.
look at the real state of nature, instead of only focusing on nitrogen.
on nitrogen.
This is endorsed by scientists, and it is a welcome distraction
after years of farmer protest and political discussion about nitrogen.
You could also hear Frans Timmermans of GroenLinks-PvdA say it on Sunday in
the RTL debate: "We talk about years, but we have to talk about nature.
nature. Which is in bad shape in the Netherlands."
A version of this article also appeared in the Nov. 8, 2023 newspaper.
Share <6 Mail the editors
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture not a watering down
16 hours ago
 Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest
milk
21 hours ago
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Take an Editorial Mediahouse NRC
Work at subscription Opinion editorial NRC Careers
Copyright Login The Ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create an account Colophon NRC Readers' Fund
Delivery terms Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My Reading List Customer Service
Our app My subscriptions Family reports
Archive Service & Delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

