= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
BACKGROUND
Farmers Get a reprieve, but European
agricultural task remains
European Agricultural Policy The planned greening of European agriculture has
barely gotten off the ground, but honking farmers still manage to force concession
concession after concession.
Clara van de Wiel 9februari2024 Reading time 4 minutes
Listening Reading List A
 and En.
off the table.
Photo Sameer Al-Doumy/AFP
 It was the third European concession to the
protesting farmers, after suspending a nature rule and limiting
cutting agricultural emissions from a climate plan later that Tuesday still
to come.
It showed: as in The Hague, the honking tractor in Brussels is proving to be a
political factor of importance. Especially as elections for the European Parliament
are approaching and no politician wants to be known as the tormentor of the European farmer.
After all, agriculture is the area where EU policy affects citizens perhaps the
most directly affects citizens. Roughly 22 percent of farmers' income comes from European
subsidies, and without those European funds the vast majority of farmers would not be able to
could not keep their heads above water.
But striking were the concessions. Especially since the previously planned
greening of European agriculture is actually barely out of the
starting blocks. Farmers are, as climate analyst Simone Tagliapietra of
the Brussels-based think tank Bruegel this week noted at X "ironically precisely a
category that has so far been largely spared from European green
policies",
Taxing emissions
At the same time, it also recently became clear once again that in order to achieve the
climate goals, agriculture cannot remain out of the picture. Although the share
 agriculture's share of total greenhouse gas emissions is relatively small at 10 percent,
these emissions have barely been decreasing for years, while they are rapidly decreasing elsewhere. "The
lack of emission reductions in the agricultural sector since 2005 underscores the
need for stronger incentives in this sector," wrote the Commission's main
climate advisory board recently wrote in a leading report.
Some of those possible incentives the advisory council also described. For example, the
taxing emissions, as is done for heavy industry and
shipping, among others. Or putting more effort into limiting meat and
dairy consumption - something that, according to the advisory council, could lead to a halving of the European
livestock and thus reduce emissions significantly.
None of these recommendations are seriously on the table yet. In Brussels there is little
more sensitive than food politics and possible European interference with national
culinary traditions. And now that the EU sees itself overtaken in digital technology and
battery development is being overtaken by China and the U.S., cheap,
safe and plentiful European food is perhaps even more than before
a symbol of pride and staying power.
In a paean to the European farmer, Von der Leyen called the European
food system "unique" this week. "The products in our supermarkets
reflect the diversity of our cultures and traditions. Europe has
the healthiest and highest quality food in the world. Thanks to our
farmers!"
 When it comes to farmers, agriculture and food, the discussion quickly becomes
emotional. And also quickly gets bogged down in a culture war. Farmers, emphasized
for example, party leader of the Christian Democrats Manfred Weber this week in
the European Parliament, "have no desire for leftist ideologies that dictate everything to them!
dictate to them!"
Economic complexity
This is not the only reason that agriculture is perhaps the most complicated
climate puzzle in the EU. In an analysis of the failure of recent
European attempts to green agriculture, French
agricultural economist Pierre-Marie Aubert mainly points out that these did not pay enough attention
to the overall economic picture. When the EU presented its 2020 agricultural strategy
presented, the biggest criticism, for example, came from the U.S., which immediately feared all kinds of
consequences for world trade. About the consequences of
overturning the existing agricultural model for trade policy, the
labor market or price pressure for consumers had not been sufficiently
thought through, he told Libération last week. "We need to bring that economic
complexity back into the ecological reasoning."
In the past, there was always one main reason farmers angrily flocked to Brussels
marched: too low prices. It makes the current wave of demonstrations interesting, says
Irish professor emeritus of European agricultural policy Alan Matthews in conversation
with NRC. He made a European comparison of farm incomes and
 observes, "The trend is precisely that average incomes are increasing, And although
incomes did indeed fall in 2023, that came after a record high in 2022.
Matthews hastens to emphasize: that does not mean that all farmers in the EU are
financially well off. Moreover, there is one main reason for the rising
average: that the number of farmers continues to decline. "You can absolutely question whether
that is a desirable development, But it has also been a structural
trend, which is also unavoidable in part because it is often
easier to be competitive if your farm is bigger."
More than against current price pressures, farmers are therefore, according to Matthews
Matthews believes that more than against current price pressures, farmers are fighting an age-old enemy.
rising faster than in their own sector. And that for many farmers
or their children ultimately find it more attractive to do something else.
"That is the challenge for Europe: to create a way of farming that is sufficiently attractive
attractive enough and at the same time is in harmony with nature and the environment," says
Matthews.
Flower strips
Not that Brussels has not attempted to do so. For example, by
introducing so-called "eco-regulations": linking direct
agricultural subsidies to nature and climate regulation, Starting in 2025, 25 percent
of agricultural money will be distributed this way, for example for the construction of flower strips
 or ditches. It should also give farmers income that is less linked to
just producing more.
And, Matthews emphasizes: in several countries, hopeful
signs can be seen. For example, in Ireland, where fertilizer use is declining
and the number of farmers is no longer shrinking, but many farmers have secondary incomes
have. And in Denmark, which has committed itself to already starting
with an emissions trading system for agriculture, as there has been for years in the EU
for industry and which is seen as crucial in reducing CO
emissions. "If that becomes a success it could be an example for Europe.
For the short term, it will have no effect. And for the European CO goals
of 2030 won't matter much either - the EU can meet those even without the
agricultural share. But for the years after that, and for the, according to experts
crucial improvement of European biodiversity, Brussels cannot get out of the
agricultural puzzle.
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 10, 2024 newspaper.
Share e% Mail the editors
AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
 The company 'Brothers C. and K. Kievit' is no more.
Oh well, what gives?
11 hours ago
EL
 
nnen
 
el ED EN and En nn
Î Î
Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture no weakening
15 hours ago
My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take One
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About NRC
Working At
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family Reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
 
