= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
NEWS
Farmer and climate protesters not
impressed with announced
tougher approach to police and justice
Violent protests An emergency order was issued in Apeldoorn on Wednesday
issued because of plans by farmers to storm the police station where
two protesters were detained. Outgoing Yesilgöz (Justice and Security, VVD)
announced that violent protests and illegal demonstrations will be more severely
dealt with.
Marcel Haenen February2024 Reading Time
 
2 minutes
Listening Reading List |
 demonstrations.
 The mayor of Apeldoorn, Ton Heerts, saw himself Wednesday night
forced to declare an emergency order for the entire municipality. With that order
the police can act against rioters, close roads, evacuate places
and prohibit gatherings. People who do not cooperate can be
detained.
The special order was deemed necessary because the police, through
chat groups of farmers on social media channels determined that a storming
of the Apeldoorn headquarters was being planned. Detained there are two men
who were detained Monday night in violent farmers' protests on the
A50 near Beekbergen. A 39-year-old man from Klarenbeek and a 35-year-old man from
Eerbeek are being prosecuted on suspicion of "dumping outside an establishment
of dumping waste, and of blocking the road," said a spokesman for the
Public Prosecutor's Office in the eastern Netherlands.
Also read
Hundreds of XR demonstrators on the A10 to
protest against ING
Tighter action from now on
The emergency order in Apeldoorn was lifted again Thursday morning. It has
remained. The police remain vigilant, also because the arrested farmers
will be brought before the examining magistrate on Friday. Justice wants them longer
 remain detained. According to the public prosecutor, on Monday evening in the eastern Netherlands at fifteen
different locations waste was dumped, set on fire or blockades were created
by garbage or agricultural vehicles. "The unannounced actions led to major
nuisance and in a number of places to unsafe situations."
The highway had to be closed all night for cleanup operations,
Firefighters were besieged at Staphorst, Steenwijk and Apeldoorn while putting out fires
by protesters.
Outgoing Minister Dilan Yesilgóz Justice and Security, VVD) on Wednesday
after emergency consultations with the police and the OM announced that from now on stricter
action will be taken against violent protests and illegal demonstrations. The
farmers' protests on Monday have led to "a lot of anger and
frustration". The minister said Tuesday in the House of Representatives that the actions
"really went beyond all limits." Demonstrating, according to Yesilgöz
Moreover, demonstrations increasingly result in the commission of crimes.
"We see farmers' protests where fires are set or hazardous materials are dumped on
roads. We see XR demonstrations where time after time
public roads are occupied, people glue themselves to the road surface and
resist the police, We see demonstrations, just this weekend in my own
city, where slogans like, "Death to Rutte. Death to Biden.
The minister then called on mayors to "really make every effort to
prevent this kind of action, indeed through police deployment",
 'Fossil moneymaker'
"The OM and the police act firmly and also take the possibilities for
fining and prosecution afterwards in this, The identity details are
established and recorded," according to a joint statement issued after the
judicial deliberations was issued. The boss of the Public Prosecutor's Office Rinus Otte
et on X know that "setting fire to hay bales and possibly asbestos on the
highways is a serious criminal offense".
The police have taken measures to quickly distribute deployment and capacity nationwide.
distribution. "In the coming period, direct action will be taken as much as possible
take action against activists who break the law or if there is no other way
can, they will be fined and prosecuted afterwards.
Extinction Rebellion, after announcing a tougher approach, let it be known in
protest against ING, "as the largest fossil lender in the Netherlands," on Saturday
February 24 blocking the A10 in Amsterdarn near the former ING
headquarters De Schoen.
The climate protesters are not afraid of fines. "Even (especially) if the government
fed up, we have the right to demonstrate peacefully. It is known that the
judge considers arrest enough punishment for violation of the Public
Manifestations. Therefore, we will challenge any fine. We look forward to the outcome
with confidence," said Extinction.
 Also read
Columns of tractors drive across Europe. Why
farmers everywhere are taking to the streets
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 9, 2024 newspaper.
Share °% Mail the editor
POLICE, LAW AND CRIME
Taghi behind bars: no letters, no Mean anam
 
aman
phone calls, no imam and only 45 minutes and nnn
 
et
ae 4
strength training per week | | Ë |
10 hours ago
The Marengo trial should open eyes:
The Netherlands has become a narco-state
14 hours ago
[Ìtoxer weenras
ES
GIN
Ò
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About us
Working at
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

