= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [E] Digital Newspaper Q
NEWS
Brussels extends new hand to farmers:
pesticide reduction off the table
Green deal In response to farmer protests, Ursula von der Leyen on Tuesday withdrew the
pesticide law. This is a new setback for European plans
to make agriculture more sustainable.
Clara van de Wiel 6februari2024 Reading Time 1 minute
Listening Reading List A
 Pesticides in the EU to be withdrawn permanently.
withdrawal. It means a new setback for the
 European greening plans of agriculture,
part of the so-called Green Deal.
Read also
Also in Brussels: the tractors appear, so
the green plans disappear
The decision comes on the day that was actually supposed to mark a new,
more ambitious climate goal - 90 percent CO reduction by 2040 - that the European
Commission is presenting later this Tuesday. Already it is clear that in that proposal
any last-minute reference to reducing agricultural emissions
has been dropped. This is also a response to the farmers' protests.
According to Von der Leyen, the pesticide law has become a "symbol of polarization"
become a "symbol of polarization," she said Tuesday morning at the European Parliament in Strasbourg. In
response to the farmers' protests, the Commission last week already scrapped a
measure intended to improve biodiversity and is considering
import restrictions on agricultural products from Ukraine.
It is highly unusual for the European Commission to withdraw a legislative proposal.
The decision follows after the European Parliament had already rejected the pesticide plan last November
had already rejected the pesticide plan. A group of EU member states made an attempt in recent weeks to develop the
proposal further, then tried to still get support in the
 European Parliament. Now that the Commission is withdrawing the proposal, that is no longer
possible.
Biodiversity
The pesticides law was the backbone of a plan to include
agriculture into Europe's climate and nature plans. The law
included binding reduction targets for member states and a ban on
use of pesticides in "sensitive areas," such as city parks, playgrounds and
near schools and sports fields.
Read also
The rate of animal and plant extinction,
was not this high in ten million years
The reason for the law was the dramatic state of biodiversity in Europe,
which, according to numerous studies, is directly related to the large-scale
use of chemical pesticides. Now that the law is being withdrawn,
the European goal of halving the use of pesticides by 2030
to halve the use of pesticides by 2030 disappears permanently from view.
According to Von der Leyen, there is a chance that the Commission may still come up with a
new "much more mature" proposal for reducing pesticides.
She left open whether that will actually happen and on what timescale.
 Share Mail the editors
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture no weakening
15 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest
milk
20 hours ago
About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Take an Editorial Mediahouse NRC
Work at subscription Opinion editorial NRC Careers
Copyright Login The Ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create an account Colophon NRC Readers' Fund
Delivery terms Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My Reading List Customer Service
 Our app My subscriptions Family reports
Archive Service & Delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

