= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News df} Podcasts [F| Digital Newspaper Q v
COLUMN STEPHAN SANDERS
Between the lines on the banners comes
another message emerges
11 July2022 Reading Time 1 minute
Reading List |
Follow
Advertisement
Tj and ad copy: 'With a dog whistle
- even from a great distance, you immediately attract the
| I wasn't thinking about dogs, I was thinking about radical farmers.
of radical farmers using large equipment in Will we
6 something nicer
revolt. They are now getting that attention
from all over the country, from city dwellers and country people. | __with that ton
 By the way, the entire text of the ad reads, "With
a dog whistle, even from a great distance you will attract
instant attention from your dog:
But such a whistle can also be used for political purposes.
use. On the banners of angry farmers there are
unmistakable texts: 'THE WAR IS
BEGUNNING WE WIN," but what I read between all those
hefty lines is something else. That this
rebellion of angry peasants is the only rightful
Dutch revolt, because here something like the
zn
first-born right. That's too long for a banner,
More info >
PA5
but the implicit message I hear.
Growing up in Twente, not Enschede, there were
children of farmers at my elementary school; I was friends with some of them, I
came to their homes. Jumping ditches, catching tadpoles in a glass jar,
helping out on the farm... No, rather not that, because as a child I was afraid of the
most animals. Everyone found that perfectly understandable, because I spoke
High Dutch, and moreover, with my appearance I belonged to an
outside category. Not from here, but from there. The city, the west, or even further
away.
Viewed from the countryside, the relationship with the city is ambiguous: feelings of superiority
and feelings of inferiority constantly alternate. Urban people
 know nothing of real life, but also: beware of city people, because they
always outsmart you. Those people from the West should not think they are more
than us. They don't. The strange thing is that most city dwellers
hardly think back about the countryside.
In any case, the actions of farmers have put an end to that abuse: the
country revels in peasant rage.
Beneath it slumbers the idea that farmers are the backbone of the country, and
belong to the category of true, unquestioning Dutchmen. I have often
pondered the prima facie incomprehensible alliance between Baudet
and peasants, but in each case they share resentment. Those who grant themselves the
firstborn right, must get white hot when those privileges are
are tampered with.
The annoying thing is that there is no right of first birth to be granted in the Netherlands:
it is not a family, but a constitutional state, and the Dutch passport can
expire, but does not become worth more the longer it is in the family.
This misunderstanding must also be eliminated - as must the nitrogen.
Stephan Sanders writes a column at this site every Monday.
A version of this article also appeared in the July 11, 2022 newspaper.
Share <6 Mail the editors
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About NRC
Working At
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

