Menu MEC)" WD Mining News df} Podcasts [F| Digital Newspaper Q v
- COLUMN CHRISTIAAN WEIJTS
Nitrogen D-Day
24February 2023 Reading time 1 minute
Listening d) Reading list
[7 uim you clean up your room, at 8:30 Advertising
hour I want everything to be spotless."
"I'll never manage that! The earliest
8:35 p.m." "Are you deluded, ain
8:30 p.m. and not a second later." "You know what?
Watch it all then." Behold our
nitrogen impasse, in a nutshell. First it was
a color map that paralyzed everything. Now it
 a year - 2030 or 2035 - that made CDAers and
VVDers in rural provinces would raise their pitchforks
at Hague party colleagues, and
coalition partners proverbially torch each other
at each other.
Why does the government choose 2030? Not because
the nitrogen inspectors from Uranus will fly by
come flying by, but because such a round number
fits more neatly into a checkered sheet than, say, March 5
2031.
So circling a nitrogen D-Day has something
arbitrary. Especially when you look at the latest official
model calculations. There we read
that even if we were to do away with
eliminate all livestock farming, 90 percent of the Netherlands
on the map - thanks to foreign countries,
which uses different models.
Curious. So those Uranian inspectors are
never going to find a tidy room at all
find. So now what? Powerless under our
mess but crawl away, waiting for the
armageddon? No. There are all sorts of reasons to
Invest from €100,000
and receive up to 5%
 want less livestock and more nature. The fixed interest rate
is about being able to broadly agree
on that aspiration, dare to go in a direction. That
does not model the optimal result,
but an improvement over today.
The dot on the horizon should be like the fly in the
urinal, which should nudge all the whiners somewhat in the desired direction, and
not the stakes for a race to pee farther ("shouldn't it be five millimeters
higher?")
The only times when I suffer from writer's block is when I have too many
American storytelling diagrams, so that my bulletin board is suddenly
hangs full of post-its full of plot points.
Concrete outlines block. Rather, just start, with an overall
mindset, and adjust your models as you go - dynamically, organically, in
interaction with reality. Even tidier Marie Kondo seems to have let go of her
neuroses unleashed since she has children and thus life has started crawling through her
model home has started crawling.
Rigid color charts and steely deadlines are giving our country policy's block. With
the clownish low point that nitrogen rules are now also delaying the expansion of the
green electricity grid. Because of the minuscule nitrogen emissions from those
 work. Tough luck, energy transition. That plot twist may not be
from the sticky bills.
Let's spend years debating the exact date when our country
should be completely finished according to which model. Then we will tie a beautiful
bow and we will live happily ever after.
Christiaan Weijts writes a column on this site every Friday.
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 24, 2023, newspaper.
Share 9% Mail the editors
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Take an Editorial Mediahuis NRC
Working at subscription Editorial staff NRC Careers
Copyright Login The Ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create an account Colophon NRC Readers' Fund
Delivery terms Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My Reading List Customer Service
Our app My subscriptions Family reports
Archive Service & Delivery
Advertising Newsletters
 NN W f ©) EH

