Photo Merlin Doomernik
 Most farmers are constructive, says
editor in chief of agricultural trade magazine New
Harvest
Esther de Snoo
The threat of radical farmers has a paralyzing effect, says the editor-in-chief of the
agricultural trade magazine Nieuwe Oogst. "They get in the way of the very progress that farmers
so desperately need.
Karel Smouter 10February2024 Reading Time
 
7 minutes
Listening (d) Reading List A
Last week the phone rang at Esther de Snoo's house.
On the line was Harm Holman, MP and NSC agriculture spokesman. The
Snoo is editor-in-chief of agricultural trade magazine Nieuwe Oogst, which is distributed weekly to
30,000 farmers and market gardeners, and Holman was eager to share his views on agriculture.
agriculture. There would be an interview. Then, early this week, the
farmer protests erupted again. FDF leader Mark van den Oever (Farmers Defense
Force) in a video slammed threatening language toward politicians in a backdrop of
burning tractor tires. Holman was also said to be "at the center of the
attention". "After the video, Holman cancelled the appointment with
us," says De Snoo.
 "With Minister Adema ditto, we were in the process of arranging an appointment with him.
But his spokesman said: we'll wait for this week first." Threats
from farmer administrators, politicians and the minister have been the order of the day for years, according to De Snoo.
the order of the day. "There is more going on than what comes out about it," he said.
We meet in a week full of new farmer rumors, this time not only in
the Netherlands but all over Europe. At De Snoo's the phone was
red-hot, with journalists looking for interpretation of yet another twist in
A saga that has been going on for almost five years now.
an editorial commentary every week, making her a familiar voice inside and outside
the industry. "We now live in a time of anger," she wrote this
week. She began in this position on ÌOctober 2019, a day that went down in farming circles as
historic in the books: the Malieveld in The Hague flooded that day with
at least 2,200 tractors and the farmers' protests led to the largest morning traffic jam in
Dutch history. And one Caroline van der Plas presented that day
a book that would sow the seeds for a political party (BBB) that some years
would later become the largest in alte twelve provinces.
That comment about "a time of anger" you could have written exactly the same way five years ago
written five years ago, couldn't you?
"Yes... Yes... I do. Yet you also hear me hesitate to answer this question wholeheartedly
yes. Because I do see change.
Five years ago many farmers were still in denial, digging their heels in
but now we - and I mean the sector - have agreed that we have to let go of the old system and move
 let go of the old system and move towards a new agriculture.
What I find significant, for example, is that for green labels and
initiatives by companies such as FrieslandCampina and Nestlé now have a waiting list.
exists. Those projects are all oversubscribed."
But why then do the farmers' protests flare up again?
"Up front: that farmers are frustrated is understandable. It is about their
livelihood security. That this issue has been put on the agenda is the great merit
of the farmers' protests. But if you drill down you also see: the balance between
agriculture and environmental limits must be restored. And then this is a
phase of the transition we have to go through. The denial phase is now followed by
a period dominated by confusion and uncertainty. Because the old
system may no longer work - for the quality of our water, the soil
the air, but also for the earning model of the farmer - the new system is not yet in place.
And that causes a lot of fear and frustration, which are expressed in the farmers' protests.
come out. We have been waiting so long for that new dot on the horizon, that
perspective."
There have been three administrators in recent years who have tried to provide
that perspective. It started with Carola Schouten (ChristenUnie),
minister of agriculture between October 2017 and January 2022. She talked about
circular agriculture, as a new ideal.
 "Yes, that was a good attempt. In which, by the way, to this day
unclear exactly what she meant by circular agriculture. But she was
awkward to the sector, for example by saying that she did not know to whom
she should speak to now if she wanted to get in touch with "the farmers. Whereas, how
difficult could it be? With LTO and NAJK [Nederlands Agrarisch Jongeren Kontakt]
you have the bulk of farmers and gardeners to deal with. By this attitude she has
alienated the sector partners."
Henk Staghouwer (ChristenUnie) took over from
Schouten as minister. He came up with a perspective letter, which he
eventually had to withdraw. What went wrong there?
"Yes, I think he was too light for the position. He kept talking too much in generalities
talk. As a result, he lacked confidence."
Then came Piet Adema (ChristenUnie), who - spurred on by Remkes' report
Remkes' report - went into the country to listen to the concerns of farmers and
reach an agricultural agreement together with the sector. Ultimately, LTO
off the table, after which this attempt to offer perspective also failed.
"The process around the agricultural agreement was intended to work with the entire chain
and nature organizations to come up with an answer to the question of how agriculture and
horticulture should look like in 2040. At the sub-tables, where agreements were
agreements were made for each type of agriculture, this usually went quite well.
But at the main table, it became too much of a tough political negotiation rather
 But at the main table it became too much of a hard political negotiation instead of an exploration to find a perspective together. It became all about
standards, levels and quantities. It lacked the very thing Remkes
Remkes called for: a conversation that restores the broken trust between the sector and the government.
restored. To ferninine leadership, I ultimately think, that creates connection
instead of removal. As a result of which, at the end, all the key players were
were pointing at each other"
To the outside world it sometimes seems as if it is never good enough for farmers,
It's always down to the other person.
"Yes. At the same time, perhaps that is precisely the gain of recent years. That
farmers have come to realize that they have to provide their own perspective. That is also
professional sector, that you don't look at others, but at yourself. The
trust in the government is more or less at the bottom. But perhaps the
government perhaps it should not come from the government at all. Five years ago, when we were
five years ago we decided that we wanted to be there for the future-oriented farmer and
future-oriented farmer and horticulturist. That sounded a lot stranger then than it does now to
the ears of our supporters. I wish Dutch farmers - the best educated
farmers in the world - more self-confidence. That they write their own
perspective letter."
 Farmers are demonstrating against European agricultural regulations that they believe are too strict. The
protests have become more grim recently.
Photo Rob Engelaar
 But in the meantime, you can only see the farmers' protest getting grimmer. There
were even injured this week, as a result of blockades. Én there
there were calls to free the two arrested protesters.
"That's something you always see with protest movements: over time, the
group of protesters becomes smaller, but more radical, In the hard core of FDF there were
always been few farmers. They are mainly contract workers and people who have something to do with the
agricultural sector, but do not work in it. And recently a number of groups have
atteral groups, such as anti-government demonstrators and even football supporters.
soccer supporters. Our reporters saw with their own eyes how at a
protest as several vans of hooligans drove by. They came just to
riot, On online peasant forums, I see that the sentiment among many is: we understand the
frustration, but condemn the methods. One is even afraid that it will backfire
effect. FDF has much less of a following among farmers than you might think, especially in
proportion to how much attention they manage to generate, The FDF board member who
participated in the verldezingen, Sieta van Keimpema, for example, did not
made it."
Are you yourself ever targeted?
"A cameraman of ours got pushed at a demonstration once. And we
once wrote a news item about the NCTV (National Coordinator
Counterterrorism and Security), which has FDF in its sights. FDF then called for
to "bombard" our editors with messages. That was limited to a few dozen
 emails, but our editors were alarmed that day. And I thought to myself
need to take it easy in my comments.
Do you think that the Agricultural Agreement would have come about if the atmosphere had not been so
intimidating?
"I find that very difficult to say. But it is certainly the case that the process under
pressure from the rearguard has stalled. The threat is
paralyzing, especially for all those farmers - the majority, it appears from
research - who do just want to move forward and be constructive. Radical
protesters have taken the debate hostage and are in the way of the progress
that farmers desperately need.
But then why aren't those moderate farmers stirring? Are they all
afraid?
"I've pied for that, too, once in a commentary: more attention to
the large group of moderate farmers. But you see that many of them are just too busy
busy optimizing their farms for the future. And yes, there is also
there is fear and peer pressure. Farmers who didn't hang their flags upside down,
were sometimes visited by colleagues asking why they didn't participate. A
portion of moderate farmers will be sensitive to that."
 Meanwhile, the protest seems to be paying off, For example, agricultural goals have already been
disappeared from climate commissioner Hoekstra's plans. Also, a proposal
am halving the use of pesticides was withdrawn this week.
"Yes, the Dutch elections are of course also being watched in Brussels,
where in 2022 first the BBB and then the PVV won the elections. Ursula Von
der Leyen ÍCDU, Commission President]) sees the European elections coming up
and is trying to take the wind out of the sails of populist parties in advance
by dismissing farmers' concerns."
On the one hand, farmers say they do not feel heard; on the other hand, the
farmer lobby still regularly gets its way, How can this be reconciled?
"A farmer is at the very beginning of a chain and actually has
little influence on how that chain runs. He does not determine the price
paid for his products and is subjected to one rule after another.
poured out on him. Not only from the government, but also from multinationals like Nestlé,
Danone and Cargill, which as companies have committed themselves to ambitious environmental and
miflieudoeten. He must comply with these rules, while the
market hardly compensates him for that. The subsidies that Europe
for sustainability are, moreover, lower than the post-war
income guarantees that farmers were used to. Those are being phased out."
your comment about a "time of anger" ends with what you think should
must follow: a period of reconciliation. What needs to happen to make this
 new wave of peasant protests calm down?
"In any case, it does not help to meet without question all the demands of radical farmers to
throw all environmental policies off the table. The fact is
that achieving climate and environmental goals goes through the farmyard. But farmers
need to feel that they do not have to face the great challenge of a transition to a new
agriculture do not have to face alone. Besides the government, the
market to compensate farmers for the role they play in the transition.
That realization now seems to be catching on. I find it encouraging, for example, that Rabobank
since the arrival of Alex Datemna, its new director of Food & Agri, is making headway.
When taking out new loans, sustainability has now become a hard requirement for that bank.
for the bank. The next phase in the transition to sustainable agriculture is
hopefully that farmers will start to see that a change does pay off."
Esther de Snoo (b1) has been editor-in-chief of New Harvest since October 2019,
from the LTO. She previously worked for titles such as Harvest and Farm. She won in 2013
the Golden Grip for best agricultural journalism and was elected in 2022
by Food100 as Food Hero. With her partner and four children, she lives in Den
Bosch.
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 10, 2024 newspaper.
Share 9% Mail the editors Z
 NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture no weakening
15 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest
milk
20 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take One
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About NRC
Working At
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

