= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
BACKGROUND
Ecological Authority: government must take
take 'urgent' action to 'effectively restore' neglected
nature reserves 'effectively restored'
Nature Many protected natural areas are in very poor condition, according to a
government advisory body. "Intervention is needed now in order to meet their own
nature goals still to be met." And not just in the areas themselves: beyond them, too.
Arjen Schreuder January 26,2024 Reading Time 2 minutes
Listening d) Reading List A
 LJ Ke u Ke u UAL me JC u
CJ
. . _. es on: Photo Vincent Jannink
opinion presented Friday to outgoing minister Christianne van der
 ago instituted by Van der Wal to assess the ecological underpinnings of
government decisions.
"The government must and can now take emergency measures to ensure its own nature goals are
still be met," writes the advisory body. With many of the most important
nature areas, the Natura 2000 areas, are doing worse than when they were notified as worthy of protection years
years ago when they were notified to the European Union as worthy of protection.
Further deterioration is not ruled out. "This situation violates
national and European legislation."
ee,
Endangered and valuable animal and plant species are disappearing,
while more common (sometimes alien, less desirable)
species greatly increase in number
Ecological Authority - in advice to Minister Van der Wal
Measures are "urgent" and should not be limited to the boundaries of the neglected natural
neglected nature reserves themselves. The environment must also be expressly
involved, according to the experts of the advisory body. "Essential is
a good understanding of the nature area within the entire landscape context.
Only then will the necessary measures for sustainable nature restoration in and
around the areas properly." Recreation should also be restricted here and there
should be curbed here and there.
 The effects of excess nitrogen and the desiccation of natural areas are
visible to all, according to the opinion. "Endangered and valuable animal and
plant species are disappearing, while more common (sometimes alien, less
desirable) species are greatly increasing in number. In some cases, only
general species remain, but even these are declining in numbers." The latter is particularly
especially so in dry forests, dune areas, moorlands, bogs, fens and
sparse grasslands.
Incomplete
According to the Ecological Authority, "effective restoration" of natural areas can be achieved in
nearly 90 percent of cases can only be achieved by taking measures
measures outside the area itself. "Think of making connections with
other nature, increasing habitat for species, reducing
of eutrophication in the surrounding area to improve water quality or the
modifying a water level, to be able to improve the availability of water in the area.
be able to improve."
For this opinion, the advisory body reviewed 70 of the 130 analyses all
provinces have made of their natural areas. These so-called
nature goal analyses are "valuable" but in some cases incomplete,
notes the Authority. For example, they do not always describe developments outside
the protected nature areas that cause the deterioration of nature within them.
cause.
 "This opinion confirms what we have known for a long time, namely that our nature is under
pressure," Minister Van der Wal announced Friday. Furthermore, she calls the analyses
of the Ecological Authority important, because "insight into how nature was
And according to her this was needed, because: "The longer we wait, the
wait, the bigger the task becomes."
This message was supplemented at 14.45 with a response from outgoing minister
Christianne van der Wal (Nature and Nitrogen, VVD).
Read also
This is the most vulnerable part of the Netherlands
Share e% Mail the editors
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures
for agriculture no weakening
16 hours ago
 Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest
milk
21 hours ago
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Take an Editorial Mediahouse NRC
Working at subscription Opinion editorial NRC Careers
Copyright Login The Ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create an account Colophon NRC Readers' Fund
Delivery terms Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My Reading List Customer Service
Our app My subscriptions Family reports
Archive Service & Delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

