= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
NEWS
European Parliament approves much-discussed
nature restoration bill approved
Ecosystems The vote, which was tense until the last minute, is a
boost for the Green Deal. However, the law was toned down considerably.
Clara van de Wiel 27februari2024 Reading time 1 minute
Listening (d) Reading List A
 AEN
 With the law, member states are obligatedgatvegelemendbieestoe, idenaidaithest old-growth forest in the Netherlands.
by 2030 on 20 percent of European land and sea areas Photo Walter Herfst/ANP
nature restoration measures will be taken. Currently, in Europe
81 percent of habitats [an organism's habitat] are in poor condition. By
2050, all of these must be restored.
Boost for 'Green Deal'
The vote is a boost for the "Green Deal," the European Union's ambitious climate and
Nature program of the European Union, which has recently come under pressure
under pressure. Until the last minute Tuesday, it remained uncertain whether the Nature Restoration Act,
which became part of a fierce political battle last year, would pass. Also
in the Netherlands, because according to critics the law would lead to even
stricter obligations for reducing nitrogen emissions. The Netherlands
abstained from a vote on the law last year.
Read also
"Will the Netherlands lock up even further?" and six other
questions about the controversial European
nature restoration law
In the European Parliament, the Christian Democratic group in particular, which includes the
CDA is part of, vehemently opposed the law. Criticism focused, among other things, on
the impact the proposal would have on European agriculture and thus on
the food supply - although scientists debunked that argument. Also
 Tuesday, many Christian Democrat MEPs still turned against
the law, also referring to the recent farmers' protests in
several EU member states.
These protests already led to the European Commission suspending various environmental rules for farmers.
suspended several environmental regulations for farmers. Also, a legislative proposal
aimed at reducing the use of pesticides was also
was completely taken off the table. It means that previous attempts to include
agriculture to be included in the Green Deal is now little left.
Read also
Farmers get a reprieve, but European
agricultural task remains
Deterioration ban
Ultimately, on Tuesday, enough MEPs proved willing to support the
Nature Restoration Act. To this end, it was weakened on numerous
Weakened on countless points last year, as a result of which, according to environmental organizations
left of the law's initial ambitions, according to environmental organizations.
For example, the so-called "deterioration ban," a controversial passage against which the Netherlands
also opposed by the Netherlands, has been watered down considerably. Instead of an obligation for
member states not to allow their nature to deteriorate any further, they now have to make
 merely 'make an effort'. Objectives for the restoration of
peatlands were also considerably watered down.
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 28 newspaper 2024.
Share Mail the editors
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture not a weakening
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest
milk
21 hours ago
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
 Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial team
About NRC
Work At
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

