= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
REPORTAGE
'Nitrogen lock' also hinders this project
for cleaner water in North Brabant
Permit freeze To prevent nitrogen emissions, projects in
North Brabant were halted. Even those that benefit nature, such as the improvement
of the water treatment plant in Oijen. "How creamy do you have to be?"
Denise Retera 18September2023 Reading Time 5 minutes
Listening Reading List A
 nnn!
zn and IT everyen In
and gn SE | gens
and ef ... >
me es
Ei MN and -
np no
=
men
Ak
 
am" _ p Fk es,
Where sand parti n enn
jes can bezi
sink.
in Oij
Le In Oijen.
The sewage
sewage treatment plant
Photo Merlin Daleman
 Step three: the sandless water enters a large tank with all kinds of lanes
through which it flows. This is the heart of the wastewater treatment plant. Here, the
ideal conditions for bacteria to consume certain waste products.
eat. Then the water goes to one of the on-site basins where the
bacteria sink to the bottom. From there, the purified water flows into
ditches and streams.
Peter Verlaan and Suzanne de Zoeten - respectively director and administrator
(Water Natuurlijk) at water board Aa and Maas - show it all at the
sewage treatment plant in Oijen, Brabant (municipality of Oss). Why there are so many
seagulls are enthusiastically bathing in the basins, they say they don't know. Verlaan
points past a string of flying gulls to a gray silo at the back of the
grounds. Last March, (now outgoing) minister Mark Harbers
(Infrastructure and Water Management, VVD) opened this facility. "It contains Norit, the
diarrhea inhibitor. We add that to the water; medicine residues bind
to it. So the water is largely purified of those residues.
Building that installation was the first step in a major renovation of the water
water treatment plant in Oijen. The water board has not made much progress in
renovation, as it was almost completely shut down last March because of
the "nitrogen lock" on North Brabant. With immediate effect, the province issued no
permits for projects with nitrogen impact on Natura 2000-
areas. New figures showed that things were going so badly with Brabant's
nature that intervention was needed.
 Read also
Sigh as nitrogen comes up for discussion at the
Brabant dialogue meeting
Right now, the temporary permit freeze is still in place. And for all kinds of
types of projects, such as housing construction, road building, building
factories. It is not known how many projects cannot go ahead for the time being.
When the province instituted the stop in March, according to a spokesperson, there were
over a hundred pending applications that were rejected because of the nitrogen lock.
In the coalition agreement that the new provincial government presented early this month
presented, it outlines how Brabant can get rid of the lock again.
But a quick solution is lacking.
In the meantime, even projects that cause nitrogen emissions but
which ultimately should help nature and the environment. This includes the renovation of the
water treatment plant in Oijen. Additional technical rooms must be built and
the spaghetti of cables and pipes underground must be replaced.
All to modernize the treatment process and make the water even cleaner.
cleaner. "Measuring is knowing," says Verlaan. He wants to say: because with these new
measure more accurately what is in the wastewater, you can treat it better.
purify it.
"If this project sits idle for too long, we won't meet our goals for the Framework Directive
Water Directive," says Verlaan. This European directive prescribes what quality the
 Dutch waters must have by 2027. Waterschap Aa en Maas must also
do its part. "The wastewater doesn't have to become drinking water," says De
Zoeten, "but it does have to become very clean so that the surface water can achieve the
desired high ecological quality."
Read also
Lieke (25) would like to take over farming,
but what about the stealing deadline?
Balancing
"Well, look how many people are working here: hardly anyone," says
Verlaan. He points to a large, white construction shack. "There's hardly anyone
left in it." Verlaan and De Zoeten are both wearing pink construction helmets and orange
safety jacket, because there is still a tiny bit of construction going on at the site. There
There are a few excavators and here and there the ground is open. "If it falls under
management and maintenance, then it can go ahead," says Verlaan slightly
mockingly, "but if I make a foundation and build a small house [for the technical
room] masonry, it's not allowed. Then the question is: how creamy do you have to be?"
The cost of shutting down the project is already "running into the several millions," Gov,
according to Verlaan. Those costs are, for example, in the storage of ordered
building materials and construction workers who were already scheduled and whom the contractor
couldn't put on another project so quickly. The longer it sits idle, the higher the
 amount. "All public money." With electric construction equipment, the project could
be resumed, but that is still very limited in availability and cannot
be used for all the work needed.
Delegate Hagar Rotjackers (Nature and Environment, Green Left) called it on the
phone "terrible" that the renovation of the water treatment plant in Oijen cannot go ahead
because of the nitrogen lock. "But we mind everything. The shutdown of housing construction,
energy transition: also bad. We do not discriminate within 'very'. Brabant must remain in
development."
Photo Mertin Daieman
According to Rotjackers, who was also in the previous provincial government, Brabant had
had no choice but to institute the permit freeze last March. "We are
obliged to check permit applications against the latest scientific
insights. And those insights were from then on the for Brabant ill-fated
nature goal analyses. All provinces had to send these analyses to the
State last spring. They serve as input for the nitrogen measures in each province.
 Roijackers emphasizes that "internal balancing" is still possible. For that you
do not need a nature permit. You must then be able to compensate for the nitrogen emissions
project at your own location, for example by switching off the gas.
Falling Deadline
The exact measures to get Brabant off the lock still have to be
yet to be worked out, says Roijackers. The coalition agreement of the new
provincial government (VVD, GroenLinks, PvdA, SP, D66 and Lokaal Brabant) shows in
at least that the province is strongly committed to strengthening the Natura 2000-
areas. And the "stable deadline" is still its hobbyhorse. That's the date -
mid-2024 for pig barns and January 1, 2026 for cattle barns - by which
Brabant livestock farmers must have made their stables 'low-emission' with
special stall systems (but organic farming or downsizing, for example, are also allowed).
also). There has been much dissatisfaction among farmers for years, partly because the province
anticipates the national nitrogen policy.
How long will it take before Brabant goes off the grid? "This is still virgin
territory, so I can't put a time frame on it," says Roijackers. "In any case, it will
certainly go area by area. Some lawyers and administrators say that the
permitting in an area may not resume until all the
measures there have been implemented and others say it may be allowed again as soon as the
package of measures is fully established. The former seems too late and the
second seems too early,"
 Just a little less strict
According to a spokesman for the Interprovinciaal Overleg (IPO), Brabant is the
only Dutch province that has declared an official permit freeze.
"But the scope for permits is also very limited in other provinces, so
in daily practice it often comes down to the same as in Brabant"
That other provinces have not formalized it as much as Brabant does is
perhaps because some want to keep the possibility of external netting,
says the spokesperson. External offsetting is taking over nitrogen space from
a company that stops. But in Drenthe, for example, where the nature goal analyses looked
cok looked bad, external offsetting has not been possible since then either, informs
that province to NRC.
 The renovation of the water treatment plant near Oijen in Brabant is largely at a standstill.
photo Merfin Daleman
 There is hope for the project in Oijen. "It seems to be going to succeed in getting the permit
still get it afloat," says De Zoeten. This is not because the Brabant
provincial government is making an exception, but because Oijen is right up against the border with
Gelderland and therefore part of the nitrogen is deposited on nature reserves in Gelderland.
precipitation. "There they are just a little less strict. And recently it became clear that
we are allowed to use the Gelderland policy line for the Gelderland areas," says
Verlaan. The small amount of nitrogen precipitation on the nature of Brabant, compensates
the water board partly by taking offices off the gas. De Zoeten:
"But I do hope that a structural solution for similar
important projects."
Read also
In Brabant, farmer resistance was brewing five years
ago, what has been done there since?
A version of this article also appeared in the Sept. 19, 2023, newspaper.
Share <6 Mail the editor
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
 Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture no weakening
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest
milk
21 hours ago
About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Take an Editorial Mediahouse NRC
Work at subscription Opinion editorial NRC Careers
Copyright Login The Ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create an account Colophon NRC Readers' Fund
Delivery terms Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My Reading List Customer Service
Our app My subscriptions Family reports
Archive Service & Delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) E
 
