12/5/22, 12:41 PM Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down - NRC
Note: Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
09:14
Groundwater goes
up, nitrogen down
The Netherlands in the rest of this century The major problems with
climate, nitrogen, housing and energy will lead to major
interventions in the landscape.
Ö Sjoerd Klumpenaar & Eppo König © November 25, 2022
Ò Reading time 5 minutes
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/25/het-grondwater-gaat-omhoog-stikstof-omlaag-a4149553 1/6
 12/5/22, 12:41 PM Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down - NRC
Now, in the 1920s, the Netherlands must decide on the big issues until
the year 2100 and beyond, said Minister Mark Harbers (VVD, Infrastructure and Water Management)
this week in the House of Representatives. Such as whether or not to construct a second coastline, a high,
wide dike in the sea as a buffer against sea level rise. If we have enough
sand for it, because the sea and river dikes also need to be reinforced.
"We know from previous major projects in the Netherlands, the Zuiderzee Works, the
Delta Works, that those ultimately took about eighty years from initial plans to realization as well
years," the minister said.
So can't the cabinet hurry up a bit more, instead of doing study after study
do research after research, asked impatient Lower House factions. Climate change and
environmental pollution, but also the energy crisis, housing shortage and the traffic jam problem will not
not solve themselves.
It shows the frustration with a government that just doesn't get on with drastic
unpopular interventions, at a time of political fragmentation and fierce social
resistance.
Very cautious
After less than a year, the Rutte IV cabinet is now very cautiously tackling the big
issues for the future. On Friday, a thick package of parliamentary
about nitrogen and agriculture, the rural area and water and soil.
In steps, Rutte IV announces that it will take more control, because the big
issues require central control. Gradually it also becomes clear how radical
the measures will be for how we live and work and move.
The Netherlands has been fighting "too much water" for hundreds of years, Minister Harbers said,
but the fight against "too little water" comes on top of that. In the
shrink in the future, due to more dry summers, population growth from 17.5 million to
nearly 19 million inhabitants by 2035 and economic development. At the same time, there is
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/25/het-grondwater-gaat-omhoog-stikstof-omlaag-a4149553 2/6
 12/5/22, 12:41 PM Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down - NRC
salinization of surface and groundwater due to rising sea levels, which are entering deeper
entering the country.
We will therefore have to be much more economical with drinking water, according to the cabinet.
The Netherlands must start using 20 percent less drinking water than now (100 liters instead of
instead of 125 liters per person per day).
There will be a construction ban in the deepest polders of the Netherlands.
How? There will be a "national plan of action for saving drinking water," but
drinking water will also become more expensive, "with guarantees of affordability," writes
the cabinet writes. The "five-minute shower a day" because of current energy prices, will become
a staying power to save on drinking water costs.
Cutting back on water will have a major impact on drinking water companies, farmers and
gardeners, food producers and industry. The supply of drinking water for
cooling to large consumers, such as data centers, for example, will be restricted, the
cabinet letter.
'Our national rain barrel'
Water and land will become more competitive in this small country. More
create more freshwater reserves, and store more water in the
IJsselmeer and the Markermeer: "our national rain barrel," as the cabinet calls them.
To keep enough space in that barrel, no new islands should be allowed in these lakes
be built for land reclamation.
Space in wetlands for housing development will be more limited - even though the
cabinet's ambition to build 900,000 homes nationwide by 2030. Around dikes
and dams, dunes and "water retaining structures," for example, enough space must
to be able to reinforce them, even after 2050.
Also new is a future ban on building in 5 to 10 percent of the deep polders in
Netherlands; the government wants to reserve these areas for water storage. That puts the
public discussion about projects such as the 'Fifth Village' in the Zuidplaspolder.
the Zuidplaspolder. Here, at the lowest point in the Netherlands at about 6.7 meters below
NAP, 8,000 new homes are to be built in the coming years.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/25/het-grondwater-gaat-omhoog-stikstof-omlaag-a4149553 3/6
 12/5/22, 12:41 PM Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down - NRC
The interests of farmers and homeowners clash around water policy. It was already leaked
this week that the cabinet wants to raise water levels in low moorland areas. Large parts
of these areas in the western and northern Netherlands have been drained to make agriculture possible.
to make agriculture possible. In the rural areas the soil sinks, and the peat dries out, releasing
harmful greenhouse gas is released.
e . . ( Lower Netherlands aah a
That subsidence is damaging peatlands: groundwater 2040 re
cm higher. In low-lying polders PP
will no longer be built. 7 É j
foundations, causing houses to sink. In
total, hundreds of thousands of homes are at risk, Im coastal areas
Salinization will occur more often
particularly in the western Netherlands, northern Friesland. occur Less zoe
and Groningen. The damage to homes, but also
infrastructure, sewers and public spaces,
amounts to several billion until 2050.
Also the groundwater level in higher Ml Rivers
More space
sandy soils in the eastern Netherlands is going up.
Soils here have been affected by, for example
No longer
building in
floodplains
and near
of levees.
Higher Netherlands
manure, pesticides, or discharges Water
 
on high sandy soils longer
retention. Groundwater levels become
of sewage treatment plants. The cabinet (E10 SOE HEE:
NRC 261122 / BL / Source: Knowledge Portal Climate Adaptation
wants to combat desiccation and the "sponge effect"
erdrying out and restore the "sponge effect" 5 High and low: measures
of the soil to retain water and
hold water and drain it properly.
But raising groundwater levels in areas also adversely affects
farmers. On soggy land, they cannot raise livestock and tractors sink.
"Unacceptable," agricultural and horticultural organization LTO calls it in a reaction. "By
the new soil and water policy almost all soil types and important
crops in the Netherlands are affected," says LTO.
Salinization
The cabinet's policy choices affect not only a professional group like farmers, but
entire regions may be affected in time.
Extra freshwater is currently being brought to areas where salinization is imminent.
14 percent of the Dutch territory is at risk of salinification: in particular the
Wadden area, the Zeeland islands, coastal areas and polders in the west. The
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/25/het-grondwater-gaat-omhoog-stikstof-omlaag-a4149553 4/6
 12/5/22, 12:41 PM Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down - NRC
increase in salt in the soil is a problem for farmers, nature and, for example, the
drinking water companies.
During droughts, peatlands will henceforth be given priority in the distribution of
fresh water, because here the groundwater level must rise. For the Rhine-Meuse estuary in
the west, there will then not be enough freshwater to prevent salinization - and this may
also apply to other areas. In fact, the government is saying: we need the transformation
of the landscape in these regions but accept it.
Peaking
Around the approach to nitrogen, it was leaked earlier this week that the cabinet is going to cut 2,000 to
3,000 large polluters ("peak polluters") to buy out, in order to restore nature.
Farmers or factories that are not tempted by the one-time buyout offer could be
be forced to quit starting in 2024.
The cabinet says it does not have an address list or a top-100 of peak farmers: the
approach focuses mainly on farmers and some 50 to 60 companies in the industry.
The cabinet letter on the future prospects for farmers is deliberately left vague and
contains little new. Agriculture minister Piet Adema (Christian Union) wants to keep leeway
to keep room to reach an Agricultural Agreement with farmers early next year on
reforming the sector. This will no doubt provoke irritation in the Lower House
which feels sidelined in this process. Adema's predecessor, Henk
Staghouwer, resigned because he could not give farmers concrete prospects for the future.
The Agricultural Agreement should be about tackling nitrogen and the transition to
sustainable 'circular agriculture,' but also as crop protection, animal diseases and
zoonoses, public health, odor and particulate matter. Farmers are "at the helm" in this
reform, but it will be a "mix of voluntary and mandatory measures,"
writes Adema. "In case of insufficient hard agreements, I will not hesitate to take these
legal measures towards the chain parties to be announced and deployed?"
What is clear is that agricultural reform is not only for the agricultural chain,
but for all of the Netherlands is going to have consequences. In 2040, supermarkets must only
sell sustainable agricultural products, is the goal. "My intention is to fill the
shelves with sustainable products. And that it is no longer a menu of choice," said
Adema on Friday.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/25/het-grondwater-gaat-omhoog-stikstof-omlaag-a4149553 5/6
 12/5/22, 12:41 PM Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down - NRC
All these reforms require active government intervention, while legal deadlines are
are getting closer and closer. It was the coalition of VVD, D66, CDA and ChristenUnie that made the
achievement of the nitrogen target from 2035 to 2030. But it is the Council
of State, the highest administrative court, that had to stop the illegal nitrogen policy of
that same government had to stop.
Even earlier, in 2027, another legal debacle could present itself,
similar to the nitrogen crisis. In that year, surface and groundwater in
Netherlands must be clean and healthy and meet European requirements. Minister Harbers says
that it will succeed, GroenLinks thinks it will take "miracles" to achieve it.
But if it doesn't succeed, you'll get new environmental lawsuits and threaten the
licensing for farmers, builders and businesses to be "shut down" again,
MPs predict.
A version of this article also appeared in the Nov. 26, 2022, newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/25/het-grondwater-gaat-omhoog-stikstof-omlaag-a4149553 6/6

