Î en et oe Sen [ 8
SO MMy news | d IR Potcasts Digital Kran Q vj
PPE UTD EENar Ger arte À
|
|
% kk " fet Î
PN AuenS PCO Sadee |
rme you ee
Photo Bram Petraeus
ANALYSIS
 Chicken farmer, corncrake, itch trail:
in the nitrogen battle, every gram of emissions counts
Nitrogen crisis The nitrogen battle, in the absence of structural solutions, is about small
pieces of land. What if a stable in Flevoland emits just a little too much on paper for a
possible habitat of an endangered bird further away?
Rik Wassens, Wouter van Loon 15September2023 Reading Time 18 minutes
Listening Reading List A
WHAT IS THE NEWS?
The RIVM wants to get rid of the management of the calculation program Aerius, with which
the nitrogen load of nature areas is calculated. The
Ministry looks at whether Aerius can be placed with another party,
the ministry confirms to NRC.
The RIVM has problems with Aerius being used for the implementation
of policy, such as assessing permit applications. This conflicts
with the "scientific task" of the RIVM.
The two most obvious parties say they would
program would rather not take over. BIJ12, the umbrella organization of
 provinces, prefers to leave everything as it is, and the Rijksdienst voor Ondernemend
Netherlands claims not to have the expertise in-house.
Before Jaap Verwolf steps into his chicken house, he always knocks on the door.
"Those white chickens scare quickly. If you don't let them know you're coming, they sit
back in the barn and you won't see a chicken," he explains, stepping into his barn. The
chickens, a few weeks old, might have heard Verwolf
approaching, they still fly over each other to flee.
Verwolf runs a rearing farm with some 70,000 chickens. They come in as
chick one day old, and leave a few months later as layers, mostly
to Germany. But 60,000 chickens are in the barn illegally - although the
poultry farmer prefers not to call it that.
His farm is located a few kilometers above Lelystad on the Visvijverweg; a long
road with only large farms. Natural areas are nowhere to be
not to be found. All the land was reclaimed from the
sea, completely to be laid out as desired. Ideal for farmers who in the 1970s
were driven out by growing cities and villages.
But according to calculations by calculation tool Aerius, Verwolf's chickens are causing
create an unacceptable increase of the nitrogen load on the nature reserve the
Rhine branches, more than 20 kilometers away near Kampen. There, 800 square
 meters of camgrass meadow, in which a protected bird can nest, the
corncrake.
It is about 0.22 moth of nitrogen per year, about three grams, a teaspoon, But even very
But even very small amounts are inadmissible because nature is in too bad a state, If only I had
If only I had worked on this nature permit years ago, Verwolf now thinks.
But according to the province of Flevoland, a permit was not needed at all.
necessary. After all, there was plenty of room here in the Flevopolder.
Giant balsamien
The smell is unmistakable. Whether there are cows, chickens or pigs, whoever walks
It is a compound of nitrogen and hydrogen from manure.
hydrogen, derived from manure. Throw it on the land, and in no time
blackberry bushes sprout, nettles, cow parsley, giant balsam.
Not every plant benefits. Sundew, orchids and heather only grow
afs they are not overgrown by nitrogen eaters. Animals that depend
on nitrogen-sensitive plants, as habitat or food source, are in dire straits.
In the Netherlands, it is difficult to limit nitrogen emissions. Consider: on a small
area are 17.5 million people, the largest seaport in
Europe, a large airport, an enormous transport sector, an extensive road network
road network ánd a gigantic livestock population. If there is space, it will be filled
as quickly as possible, also in the nitrogen file.
 And so the government wants to know exactly where nitrogen can and cannot be emitted.
be emitted. But how do you find out?
Nitrogen is lighter than air - blow ammonia into a balloon, release it and it rises
up. Think of a barn or factory as a place where hundreds of those balloons are
released. Where do they land? Preferably not in natural areas - but in residential areas,
parking lots or meadows is not a problem.
For years, the Netherlands made a simple estimate of the nitrogen load on
nature with a "distance table," But wind direction, rain, the type of landscape,
chemical processes in the air - it all affects where nitrogen
ends up. With more details, was the idea, you can map the
map the nitrogen space - and fill it.
This idea still grips the Netherlands. As long as the government does not
succeed in significantly reducing nitrogen emissions, the fight for space will be
will be waged with nitrogen calculations in hand. It leads to lengthy
bureaucratic procedures that revolve around no more than a few grams, around
tenths of a mole per year.
Twenty cows
In 2017, Jaap Verwolf wants to expand his barns. He knocked on the door of the province of
Flevoland with plans for a new chicken house with state-of-the-art
 techniques. Substantial conveyor belts run under the chicken coops that remove the manure a few
several times a week to remove the manure. That saves ammonia emissions.
Verwolf is not the only one with plans. The entire Fish Pond Road is beating the
rebuilding. Neighbor Arend Heida, a dairy farmer, also wants new stables. His
father moved into the farm that is now his in the 1970s. Those stables are
in need of replacement, and he wants to expand his business by twenty cows right away.
To calculate the nitrogen load of the
livestock farmers for the first time using a new calculation tool, with
incredibly detailed results: Aerius. The companies do not even need a
permit, the province said in 2017, so small is their nitrogen load. A
"notification" under the then-new PAS, the Program Approach to Nitrogen, suffices.
"I did want a permit," Verwolf says now, "but it just wasn't possible. You had
really no choice."
There is a brand new calculation model in 2015 * around which the entire nitrogen approach will be
is being built around: Aerius. Nowhere in the world is nitrogen precipitation calculated in such
detailed as in the Netherlands.
But Aerius can do more. There is not only an application to calculate permit applications
applications, but also a function that calculates how much measures will
yield. And one that shows how the natural areas are doing. In fact
Aerius thus becomes the government's accounting program.
 The nitrogen accounting of the PAS works like a credit card: farmers and
developers can "borrow" nitrogen, which will later be "repaid" with
measures such as the removal of land with too much nitrogen ín natural areas,
or less fertilization. In the PAS it becomes a legal obligation to submit a
permit application to perform a calculation with Aerius.
Wind direction, rainfall, the type of landscape, chemical processes in the air
it all affects where nitrogen ends up.
Everyone is extremely enthusiastic: the system is so easy to use and yet so
accurate. "We were handing out candy and popsicles at the time," says Mark Wilmot, the
inventor of Aerius. He works at engineering firm WING and in 2010 was
seconded to the Ministry of Economic Affairs, which agriculture then
under, to work on Aerius. Wilmot is proud when trade magazine De Boerderij nominates his
invention was nominated in 2016 for the Computable Awards, the most important ICT
prize in the Netherlands. The calculation tool wins in the Government category. Aerius seems to have achieved the
impossible: farmers are happy and nature will recover - in time.
recover - in time, that is.
But in May 2019, PAS fails before the Council of State. The government issues all kinds of
permits, but fails to actually reduce the nitrogen load.
 reduction. The judge rules that not an ounce of nitrogen on nature may be added
until a substantial reduction is achieved, The nitrogen bank is declared bankrupt.
What remains is Aerius, a legally required system that calculates in detail the
nitrogen precipitation, with no room to spend,
After the Council of State's ruling, poultry farmer Jaap Verwolf still shrugs his
shoulders still. "At the time we thought: it will all work out. The minister promised
time and again: the PAS reporters will be legalized because they have acted 'in good
in good faith,"
But without a permit Verwolf can do nothing: not sell his business, not
expand, cannot get a loan from the bank. Without the PAS notification, he falls back
to his previous permit, but it is so old that no one can find it anymore.
Verwolf found an older nuisance law permit himself, with space for
10,000 chickens. "With that, it's impossible to make money," he says.
At Verwalf, discomfort grows when the promised solution from the ministry
fails to materialize: nothing is happening. Environmental organization Mobilisation for the Environment
(MOB) has enforced in court that the province of Overijssel must take action
take action against the PAS notifiers - perhaps Flevoland will be next.
Verwolf now decides wêl make work of his permit. Only that 0.22 mol
nitrogen on the habitat of the corncrake stands in the way.
 Dronten
ld
Á
ij"
Seven farmers on Visvijverweg in Lelystad are largely illegal.
After the Council of State scrapped the nitrogen policy in 2019, they have
no permit they can fall back on. One of them is
poultry farmer Jaap Verwolf.
 His farm can get a permit if his business does not have a negative effect
on nitrogen-sensitive nature within 25 kilometers of his farm.
 The same applies to his neighbors.
They are all obliged to make a calculation with the
Aerius calculation program. If this shows that extra nitrogen falls on
an (almost) overloaded area, it becomes difficult to obtain a permit.
permit.
 There is not much nitrogen-sensitive natural area nearby. But in
Rijntakken nature reserve, near Kampen, there is one piece of overburdened
nature, just within a 25-kilometer radius.
 There is about 800 square meters of land where reed can grow.
This is sensitive to nitrogen and is important for a protected bird: the corncrake.
corncrake.
 The contribution is not large. According to Aerius, 0.22 mole, or about 3
grams of nitrogen from Jaap Verwolf's chickens lands on this piece of nature reserve.
Below the line
Few farmers would now want to nominate Aerius for an award.
They now make their own calculations to show that the figures from the
program are incorrect, are filing lawsuits against the use of Aerius.
The judge dismissed the farmers' objections.
But there is also well-founded criticism of Aerius. In March 2020, an advisory
a committee led by Leen Hordijk, emeritus professor of
Environmental Systems Analysis. He looked at Aerius at the request of the
Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality (LNV). The committee
Hordijk concludes: the uncertainty margins of Aerius are huge *.
That is not a problem if you want to know what the state of nature is at the national level
state: sometimes nitrogen precipitation in practice will be a little more, sometimes a little less,
and so the below-the-line estimate is pretty reliable.
But for a permit application, where the nitrogen load of one farm is
is being calculated, the model is "unsuitable," Hordijk judges. The average
margin of uncertainty is 70 percent; at large distances, 100 percent is not at all
strange. This provides "false security," Hordijk argues. The chance is too great that the
permit application will be unfairly rejected - or granted.
 Farmer Arend Heida's cow farm.
Photo Bram Petraeus
The professor emeritus suggests a series of solutions. Until then, the
nitrogen precipitation of farmers on natural areas throughout the country was calculated. The
Ministry decides after Hordijk's report to limit that to a radius of 25
kilometers around a farm.
Another important piece of advice from Hordijk is to no longer calculate on small areas of one
hectare *size*. Choose a somewhat larger area, he advises.
Some ecologists are opposed to this because useful information is lost,
says ecologist Roland Bobbink of Research Center B-WARE. Bobbink was in
several groups that advised the ministry on Aerius. Bobbink himself is
in favor of Hordijk's proposal, but, he says, the level of detail has
 law has a function, "The Dutch nature is simply fragmented, first you have
First you have, for example, a pond of half an acre, surrounded by a strip
wet heath of 50 meters and then a forest. I know areas where in one square
kilometer ten habitat types already exist."
But counting on a hectare also allows for more economic activity.
Because if you count on larger areas, the most vulnerable nature gets the most
weight: the strictest nitrogen standard will then apply to the entire larger area, which also contains
less vulnerable nature. Then even less can be done, warns
the Ministry and RIVM, among others.
Nothing has been done with Hordijk's proposal.
Picky bird
Crex crex, the screeching call of the corncrake - often compared to a bank
bank card rasping over a comb of hair - is equal to its Latin species name. The
males often sit near each other, in places where their
communal snaring carries far, sometimes as much as a kilometer. Overflying
females are thus enticed to perch. "The males signal to the
females: here is good," says quail king expert Kees Koffijberg.
Useful, because the corncrake is difficult to spot, says Koffijberg,
monitoring network coordinator at the SOVON bird expertise center and author of many studies
about the bird. The corncrake, twenty to thirty centimeters long on remarkably
 long legs, barely emerges during the breeding season from the knee-high
grassland where it prefers to nest. The grass must not be too dense, or the
corncrake can no longer move through it. The species count is done on
warm evenings in May, by volunteers hustling at possible nesting sites.
hustle.
In the Netherlands, the corncrake is rare anymore, despite its protected
status and ambitious goals. In the Rhine branches there should be about 160.
but last year SOVON counted six there, in the whole country
ninety. Suitable habitat is plentiful, says Koffijberg. But the grassland should
not be mowed during the long breeding season of the corncrake,
between May and August, which often goes wrong. If no
sharp measures are taken, the species will no longer occur in the Netherlands, SOVON thinks.
occur in the Netherlands, SOVON thinks.
Guess the piece of land that Verwolf's Aertus calculation is on is in a
potential habitat of the corncrake. In some places, reed canary grass
which the corncrake sometimes breeds in. But it is
nitrogen-sensitive, and the natural area is almost overused. Farmers or
developers who want to start a new project in the area must
therefore have to make an Aerius calculation.
It involves some 800 square meters, located on a plot that dairy farmer
Gijsbert van den Berg leases. His cows sometimes walk there, he fertilizes it and cuts
the grass. In the middle of the plot, he picks a few blades near the carrots from the
 field. No ridge grass, Van den Berg concludes. He points to the red base:
"typical of English ryegrass."
Ridgegrass
Making a map is a delicate job, Little is as definitive as a line
on paper. In the case of the maps in Aerius, it means separating between
nitrogen sensitive and not nitrogen sensitive. Between: something can be done here, and
maybe nothing,
It is a task in the hands of the provinces. They have to make an inventory:
where is which species potentially occurring? Where does reed canary grass grow, where are
juniper thickets, where might lapwing or kingfisher nest? The province draws
the lines.
 The area where camgrass could grow, but is not growing now.
Photo Bram Petraeus
For maps of protected plants, ecologists often trek into the field. But
for protected species, maps are made from large
data files - with data on tree height, soil type and the
water table - and the Habitat Suitability Index, another mathematical model *. In it
preferences of protected species are linked to characteristics
of the terrain and vegetation that may occur on it. The nitrogen-sensitive
areas are forwarded to Aerius, because on those areas
nitrogen precipitation must be taken into account.
 The model does not provide a perfect estimate of the animal species and plants present, admits the province of Gelderland.
The province of Gelderland, as 'forerunner' responsible for the Rijntakken
for the Rijntakken nature reserve. Anyone who discovers that a map is incorrect,
is invited to report it to the province.
After the fall of the PAS and critical parliamentary questions, Gelderland sent in 2021
ecologists for the first time to check the maps with habitats of animal species.
to check. 75 percent of the areas visited were eventually found not to be
nitrogen sensitive and were subsequently removed from Aerius, In the next round, that
error rate will be lower, emphasizes the province, because ecologists first
visited areas with the greatest doubts.
Escape route
From behind his desk, agricultural consultant Sjaak Van Schaik clicks open StreetSmart
open, software with aerial photos and pictures of the landscape around roads. He sees
the patch of possible ridge grass change over the years and quickly concludes: there
tractors are driving over it. It's probably being fertilized. "Regular agricultural
use," he notes in an ecological test.
Typically, Van Schaik, who works at consultancy firm VanWestreenen, works for
clients on the Veluwe. This often involves many moths of overrun on many
hectares of nature, but in the case of Jaap Verwolf's poultry farm it is about a
contribution to one small area. He immediately sees opportunities.
 As long as he can convincingly demonstrate that that little bit of nitrogen has no effect on the
corncrake, the permit can still go through,
Nitrogen is "a very limited bottleneck" for the corncrake, Van
Schaik. For the corncrake, management is much more important, for example, the fields
no longer size, That should be done by the farmer who maintains the land. The
Verwolf's nitrogen emissions have no influence on that, Van Schaik writes.
The province goes along with this, Verwolf receives a provisional permit, The
Van Schaik's ecological test also sets the province of Flevoland thinking.
Verwolf's neighbors on Visvijverweg are also PAS reporters. And they have to be
legalized, the national government instructed the provinces. So the neighbors soon received
a mail from the province. Six bite - they engage their own consultant,
who adopt Van Schaik's report word for word. At the end of November
they submit their permit applications.
A few days later they already receive good news: the province plans to give them a
permit.
Sure, you can criticize Aerius, the ministry acknowledges. But, they say:
then there is an ecological test, which can show that the
calculated nitrogen load does not lead to deterioration of nature. That makes
an Aerius calculation not a Solomon's judgement, on the basis of the test a
permit can still be granted if the Aertus calculation shows red figures,
This is how Cok Verwolf got his permit,
 The escape route is difficult though. A permit applicant
has to arrange and pay for the assessment himself, Often larger
natural areas, and ecologists have to analyze many hectares. That has to be paid out of
own pocket. For large project developers or the state it is no
problem to hire those expensive consultants. For individual livestock farmers that
high price is more difficult to pay. The ecological test is therefore
little used, even the ministry admits when asked. Verwolf and his
were lucky: because only one hectare was involved, the costs were not too high.
Another problem: a consultant was seldom in a position to present an outcome that was not convenient for the client.
client is ill-suited to. Raoul Beunen, associate professor of Environmental
Environmental Policy at the Open University, sees a risk in this: "Provinces
often do not have the capacity to look very critically at those ecological tests.
look at them."
Environmental organization MOB, which filed a long series of lawsuits around nitrogen policy
has therefore set its sights on the ecological test.
They fear that in this way all kinds of small bits of extra nitrogen deposition
will eventually be allowed. Beunen: "I think that is also a risk.
It is easy to argue towards small bits that 'can be done anyway'. Those
can add up to large sums, you also saw that with the PAS."
Single chamber
 At the end of August 2023, Jaap Verwolf is in court for the first time in his life.
The administrative judge of the single chamber in Lelystad is considering the
license of his company; Verwolf himself is not a party. The national lawyer defends
on behalf of the province in granting the permit. On the other side is
MOB, represented by counsel Stijn van Uffelen. He wants the
Verwolf's permit be annulled,
The case has long since ceased to revolve around the nitrogen from Verwolf's chickens. The
issue is the ecological test: is it sufficient to issue a permit on,
or should the province issue a "positive refusal"? In that case
Verwolf's business legal only as long as conditions or the
policy rules do not change.
That is the purpose of MOB, Van Uffelen explained to the judge. If the farmers get a
permit, with a high degree of legal certainty, it becomes much
more difficult for the state or province to take nitrogen measures. "There are
thousands of farms in the same situation, If those get a permit
an effective nitrogen policy does become very difficult" MOB is now also pursuing
cases against eight other livestock farmers in the province, including Verwolf's neighbors.
Squeezed together
Towards the end of each year, officials at afte provinces sit with
squeezed together. It is the time when Aerius is updated, and everything can be
be different in one fell swoop.
 All new knowledge is incorporated into Aerius every year. Part of those
changes are actual: does a farmer stop? Then his nitrogen emissions are removed from the
calculations. Some of the changes are new insights: if better information about
comes better information about emission sources, then that has consequences for the
calculations around the border.
It leads to unpredictable fluctuations. Pieces of nature that one year
under pressure one year can, without anything having changed in reality, be well
next year are well below the nitrogen standard. Nature where nothing seems to be
may be a problem case a year later. This can have major implications
for a positive refusal: due to the update of Aerius, a farm may
suddenly tûch have an unacceptable nitrogen contribution.
Something like this happens early this year to the farmers of the Fishpond Road, The piece of nature
on which the permits hang, after the update of Aerius suddenly has
no longer a nitrogen problem - the nitrogen load there is lower than previously
calculated. Therefore, it now no longer counts in the Aerius calculation. However, 3.8
kilometer away, the nitrogen load increases by 106.3
mol. And that area is now wêl in the danger zone.
 Nitrogen sensitive hexagons
@ Not overloaded
@ (Almost) overloaded
Camps
250 m
When the neighbors on Fish Pond Road apply for a permit, it's
all about the piece of nature west of Kampen.
 But on Jan. 26, 2022, nitrogen calculation model Aerius will be updated.
All kinds of data sources are updated annually and those results are then
then processed in Aerius.
 The nitrogen precipitation on the piece of nature that was a problem before,
dropped in the new calculation and is no longer relevant for
permit.
 But a few kilometers away, the calculated nitrogen precipitation of a piece of
a piece of nature by more than 100 mol. That area is now in the
danger zone.
 But for some farmers, this piece of nature falls outside the
25 kilometers, and it does not count for the permit.
For a moment everything seems to start all over again: is a new report needed
for that other piece of nature? But after a site visit in February, the
province: the two nature areas are similar, the old ecological test
continues to apply.
It is logical to update Aerius every year, thinks Wim van der Maas of the
RIVM. "International treaties stipulate that every year we have to recalculate all emissions
should be recalculated every year."
This is where scientific precision clashes with practicability, sees Aerius inventor
Mark Wilmot. Often Aerius is seen as one big scientific project
in which the monitoring of the quality of nature and the granting of permits are
are firmly linked together, he says. RIVM also sees it this way. "But in
But in reality Aerius consists of all separate programs that use the same
the same computational heart," Wilmot states. "Those programs can be developed separately
The part from which a national picture emerges must comply with the
international treaties, but the part from which a
permit application is not. "Update the program for
permits every three years, that gives a more stable policy," Wilmot believes.
 But the RÉVM does not want to make an exception. "We say: we update everything,
no cherry picking," says Van der Maas.
Aerius is now part of a "government-wide redesign" of ICT. The
RIVM wants to get rid of parts of Aerius in any case, confirms the Ministry of LNV
asked. The institute has particular problems with the part that is
used for permitting. The ministry is investigating which organization
can best take on the management of Aerius then.
 After updating Aerius, another piece of nature became relevant. There are sometimes
sheep.
Photo Bram Petraeus
 "We really did laugh about it at times," says Verwolf at the
kitchen table of neighbor Arend Heida. "Such a little bit of nitrogen on an area
the size of a garden. What is it really about" Heida couldn't contain his laughter
hold back when he heard that the corncrake had been
had been heard. "He was just sitting here, under our cloud of nitrogen. "The lawsuit will take
take years, Verwolf also realizes. Probably all the way to the Council
of State.
"It's not yet to the point where I say, I'll put a sign in the garden and emigrate," says
Verwolf. "But if that permit doesn't get there, it will be done at some point."
Goat trails
How much time may go into a case for three grams? How many magistrates,
officials, consultancies and lawyers have to deal with it?
There is also discomfort at the Ministry of LNV about such cases, but there is
no alternative, it sounds. Aerius, says the ministry, is simply the best
we have.
Nitrogen professor Jan Willem Erisman finds the battle over grams of nitrogen
a waste of energy. "We put more effort into ited paths and legal
constructs than real solutions," he says. The strict test of Aerius remains
therefore necessary, he says, as a stick. "Only when the nitrogen load
goes down structurally, can anything happen again" Also Stijn van Uffelen of MOB
would prefer to spend his time differently, "I would rather work for the government on
 policy to reduce nitrogen, but real solutions are not
negotiable."
The plans of outgoing prime minister Mark Rutte (VVD) to "accelerate" the nitrogen policy are
"accelerate" are in jeopardy now that his cabinet has fallen. Where farmers, provinces
and environmentalists compete for a teaspoon of nitrogen, a hectare of
overburdened natural area still averages about 550 moles of nitrogen too much.
Ecologist Roland Bobbink summarizes, "We put a lot of time into a little bit of
nitrogen precipitation on one hectare. But we are not doing what is much more necessary: the
nitrogen emissions need to come down quickly."
NITROGEN
For years, the Netherlands has been emitting more nitrogen than nature can tolerate. To
reduce emissions, the government is targeting "peak emitters" -
nitrogen emitters whose emissions land in sensitive natural areas. Many of
these so-called peak emitters are livestock farms - these farms are often
located close to sensitive natural areas. What is the perspective left for the
livestock farmer in the Netherlands? And will they cooperate with the nitrogen approach? NRC
Explores the nitrogen problem and the perspective for agriculture. View the
overview
 A version of this article also appeared in the Sept. 16, 2023, newspaper.
 Share Mail the editors
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About us
Working at
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
 
