mm This is an article from the NRC archive ®
Note: Elements may be missing from this print version.
TRAFFIC AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Corn more lucrative as energy
than as food
SUSTAINABILITY BIOGAS WITTENDORP KLAZIENAVEEN ALMELO
Alex Wittendorp, who because of his health had to stop
ecological farming, has started a company that generates electricity from
biogas. "That I had to leave the farm still hurts."
Ö HeleendeGraaf © 18april2003 ÒReading time
 
2 minutes
Actually, Alex Wittendorp had not wanted to be at his current workplace at all. Ideally
he would be at work on the farm near Klazienaveen, busy farming, with his
dairy goats and sheep. Instead, he sits, neatly dressed in a suit, in an office building
located on a windy parking lot in Almelo, right next to the stadium of soccer club
Heracles.
 Wittendorp may no longer be a farmer, but he is still an entrepreneur. Earlier this year his
latest project started: the sustainable energy company Greenpower.nu; an energy company that wants to produce
wants to produce and stimulate sustainable energy through biogas.
Under the motto "sustainable living is: sustainable thinking and sustainable acting,
Wittendorp officially launched Greenpower.nu early this year. With the company
the 41-year-old entrepreneur sell sustainable electricity to companies and households. There are,
since the market for green electricity was released in mid-2001, many companies have come
engaged in this field, but Wittendorp is going a step further and selling energy that is
generated using biogas. Biogas is released from biomass (for example, cut corn or
corn) that is stored in a sealed silo. The gas is then converted into electricity by a
cogeneration plant to convert it into electricity. "I was always interested in biomass and had
already a small company doing feasibility studies for farmers who were thinking about doing something
doing something with biogas," says Wittendorp. "It is already more lucrative for farmers to grow corn
corn for energy generation, rather than for food."
Wittendorp knows all about farming, For fourteen years he had a farm near the Drenthe village of
Klazienaveen, until he fell ill on October 1, 1996. "I got a condition of the
airways. I had to cough continuously because my airways became hyperactive; it was
so bad that I could no longer drive a car. After a while it turned out that I had become allergic to animals
become," says Wittendorp, who at that time not only had cattle and sheep, but was
was also experimenting with dairy goats.
The allergy was untreatable and there was no choice but to send his 12 employees
home and sell the farm, a decision that still
bothered. 'I had consciously become a farmer, partly because it is a healthy life. My father
Although he has traded the barn for an office, he has not forgotten the farm and the animals.
the farm and the animals. "It still hurts every day."
 Through energy activities, Wittendorp still stays involved in his old profession. He
invested 300,000 euros in setting up the company he runs with an employee
and for which he has so far recruited twenty customers, He is trying to win them through the
website and will soon begin nationwide advertising. Farmers he sees not only as customers,
but mainly as suppliers, because building biogas plants is what Wittendorp
envisions with his company. "Consumers who buy electricity from Greenpower can
get an extra discount if they buy a share in a biogas project, which gives an additional
additional incentive and gets people involved in renewable energy."
Virtually all the money he earns from the power supplies he funnels into setting up
the power plants, an activity he has placed in another company: Biogas
International, which already has a number of projects underway. "I don't need to get that big with
Greenpower, just big enough to be able to carry out projects in biogas," says
Wittendorp who definitely does not see himself as an idealist who thinks he can make the world
better. "I do want people to be aware of renewable energy, and consciously become customers
with me. Not because there is a gift attached to that, a means by which other
energy companies lure customers with."
With his company, Wittendorp hopes to win farmers in particular to expand their activities in the area of
of power generation, Farmers have for years had windmills in their yards
and can now therefore cok biogas plants down to provide households with power
with the great advantage of keeping the kcht burning even when there is no wind. "It
hurts me that people think farmers are no longer needed to grow
food, I hope that if people know that the farmer helps to generate energy the image
of the sector will get a little better again.
This is the sixth installment on startups. The first installment appeared on March 8
March.

