= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
NEWS
North Holland furious over allocated
amount Rijk to fight nitrogen crisis
fight
Nitrogen crisis The province is getting 12 million euros from the state to fight the nitrogen crisis
ward, but was counting on nearly 80 million euros.
Martin Kuiper 19februari2024 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening Reading List A
 LJ ele Ll JLU V . = u LJ
7 . Ì Protesting farmers at the Haarlem county hall.
take measures to deal with the nitrogen crisis. The province had to
Photo Robin Utrecht/ANP
 In total, the national government has set aside 1.3 billion euros for rapid measures, it
it announced earlier this month. The amount has already been approved by the
House of Representatives, but still has to pass the Senate. In particular
agricultural provinces Noord-Brabant (222 million euros) and Overijssel (142
million), but also Utrecht (284 million) receive a lot of money. Last summer
the provinces submitted their plans and their costs. These were
then recalculated on behalf of the Ministry of Agriculture by
researchers from Wageningen University & Research.
The money must be used to take measures that will benefit the (nitrogen-sensitive)
nature, water and air quality. This varies from technical
measures in the stables of farmers to keeping fewer animals. If
farmers keep fewer animals, they earn less and have to look for other ways to earn extra money.
for other ways to earn extra money.
Two months ago, the province of Overijssel and the state were in
the clinch
Agriculture deputy of the province of North Holland Jelle Beemsterboer
(BBB) - in a response published online - reacts vexed at the allocated
amount: "We applied for 80 million to strengthen the nature of North Holland.
strengthen. But due to apparent arbitrariness of the ministry we are left with 12
 million left over. The agriculture deputy is referring to the technical solutions that are
were in the plan of the province of North Holland which, according to him, due to
time pressure" were not assessed by the State. According to him, only two of
the seven projects assessed. "This cannot be explained."
There have been more frequent hassles over funding for the provincial nitrogen approach.
Two months back, the province of Overijssel and the state were at loggerheads. When
Overijssel even threatened to stop its approach if the state did not quickly come up with money
money quickly. The province had advanced millions
but was now tired of it - money had to come. In a letter the
In a letter, the province urged this. In the end, the province did not stop its approach.
The bickering between the state and the provinces symbolizes the at times
very difficult relationship between the two. When the provinces last
summer announced their nitrogen plans - totaling 58 billion euros - a
spokesperson for Minister Christianne van der Wal (VVD, Nitrogen and Nature) said that
there were in the provincial approaches cok "wishes and presents" that had little
to do with nitrogen and mainly benefited the living environment.
The lackadaisical response that the province of North Holland online
published, in addition to the tight budget that has been allocated, has another
cause: the fear of encroaching farmers causing unrest in the province.
Over a week ago, two hundred farmers with tractors suddenly stood
in front of the county hall in Haartemn. Those farmers are in trouble, said the
 agriculture deputy. If more money is not forthcoming to help farmers there is a chance
that resistance will grow in the province.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Food Quality and Nature (LNV) says it was "in
the expectation" that not every province would receive the same amount of money
and stressed that the provincial plans had been "independently reviewed."
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 20, 2024 newspaper.
Share Mail the editors
AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
The company "Brothers C. and K. Kievit" is no more.
Oh well, what gives?
12 hours ago
Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture no weakening
16 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take One
NRC Media House
Editorial team
About NRC
Working At
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

