= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
OPINION
Nature is not full, but wrongly
designed
Nature conservation Too crowded in nature? Visitor flows can be much better
control. Make the Veluwe one big National Park, for example, instead of
several small parks, argues Hans Marijnissen.
February 13, 2024 Reading time 4 minutes
Listening d) Reading list
 also sometimes rest, 10/2). Wildlife feels hunted, birds are frightened and Illustration Hajo
rare plants are trampled. A complaint that is not new, but has been heard since the
corona crisis has been audible. Nor will anyone deny that it is getting busier in the
 woods and on the moors, but is barring the public and
taxing activities the right solution?
First, take a step back. After all, why has it become busier
become busier in nature? In large part, it is the
result of years of deliberate policy. Nature organizations
introduced fifteen years ago the so-called
public forester," a forester who does not
not only manages nature and goes after poachers, but also
Hans Marijnissen is
specific task of connecting the general public with journalists and hikers.
nature: by organizing excursions, providing information on the spot and
and sharing his experiences on Twitter.
Remarkably, with the emergence of these "stewards of the forest," the
irritation with visitors actually seems to increase. "Sometimes I think: if only the forest could
lock up for a while," said Forestry Commission forester Lennard Jasper in December
2020 already in NRC. That is a very strange statement, especially coming from the mouth of a
public forester. He seems to be succumbing to his own success.
What also does not help against the crowds is the introduction of the (cross) bike in the
protected nature reserves, something the previous director of
Natuurmonumenten Marc van den Tweel was so committed to. Cyclists
get much further into the forest, communicate screaming and damage the
trails, especially when water levels are high, as they are now. Van den Tweel loved
cycling that he only transferred directly to NOC-NSF in 2021; the trace of his
 ambition is still visible daily in the fragile nature of the organization he
left behind.
People are herd animals
In search of how to turn the tide, angry foresters
and conservationists should perhaps take a look at the episode from the television series Nederland van
Above (VPRO, 2011), in which the mostly empty landscape is seen from a
helicopter, plane or hot air balloon is portrayed. In the episode
'Gebaande Paden' the program makers conduct an experiment, coincidentally
exactly in the area where the quoted forester Jasper rules the roost.
One hundred hikers are given a GPS tracker, and from the air they are
monitor how they move through the forest. And what turns out? The vast majority
most hikers neatly follow the signposted route and look out deep into the forest.
into the forest.
The then forester Paul Suurmond of that area says in the broadcast
that people are herd animals. Without a marked route they would hopelessly
lost. Most visitors already find it scary when they can't hear the sound of
the provincial road.
This excerpt shows that nature managers control visitor flows down to the
micro level to a large extent they can "steer" themselves. Those who design parking lots and
roadsides are well designed, they will not have to deal with traffic chaos. Whoever
build bollard routes, spread over several locations that have primarily a
 recreational value and are less vulnerable, thus prevents
hikers from clumping together, getting into sensitive vegetation or disrupting wildlife
disturbing,
Yosemite
When it comes to managing visitor flows on a larger scale, there is a lot that
nature managers in the Netherlands can learn a lot from the experiences in the United
States, where, in the absence of historic buildings, the landscape was very early on nurtured as a
'monument' was cherished. There, rangers protect vulnerable
areas by using so-called 'zoning': the subdivision
of an area into sectors with a defined function,
Whoever arrives by car in parks such as Yosemite, at the edge of the
reservation first encounter a huge parking lot with a visitor center, catering
and restroom facilities. From there, easy hikes of an hour
to be made, on paved trails with trash cans. The dog may be walked here
and photograph the wedding couple. Those who want to go further than a Sunday
stroll, you can go on the wilder trails, which are a lot more
more strenuous and therefore quieter, The real diehards walk in a multi-day
trek to the core of the area, but need a permit to do so.
, So that zoning provides a distribution of types of visitors, while the
vulnerable flora and fauna are spared,
 Parking, that do
 
You can park your car at Natuurmonumenten
internationally protected Posbank
Jasper's Veluwe is no Yosemite, yet with 91,000 hectares it could be Europe's
largest contiguous nature reserve in Europe. Could be -
because the much smaller Veluwe has been cut up again in his Dutch
small parks, each with its own manager. The facilities are also
not on the edges, but in the middle of those protected nature reserves. Parking,
you do that at Natuurmonumenten on the internationally protected
Posbank. There is even an asphalt road leading to it. That is exactly what causes
unwanted pressure on vulnerable locations.
If the nature managers were to join forces, the Veluwe could become one
National Park, but a nature reserve with style. With good facilities
facilities on the edges, while the core is only accessible to those who are willing to invest
time, effort and money. The same applies, of course, to the
other areas.
This I would like to pass on to the angry foresters: don't become a green whiner,
but build with your colleagues a new classification of our robust nature.
It can take a beating.
 Join the conversation and send a letter!
Would you like to respond to an article? Use this form to send a letter (maximum 250 words)
to the opinion editor of NRC.
A version of this article also appeared in the February 14, 2024 newspaper.
Share Mail the editors
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture not a watering down
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest
milk
21 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take One
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About NRC
Working At
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

