12/5/22, 12:40 PM Opinion | Looking at the whole chain when storing CO2? Then 'sustainable' too - NRC
Opinion
Note: Elements may be missing from this print version.
Looking at the whole chain
look at the whole chain? Then also at 'sustainable
Climate Factories that emit CO2 cause more emissions than
just in the factory itself. Indeed, writes Wouter van Dieren, just as
many emissions precede the commissioning of solar cells
or an electric car.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/bij-co2-opslag-naar-de-hele-keten-kijken-dan-ook-bij-duurzaam-a4150275 1/2
 12/5/22, 12:40 PM Opinion | Looking at the whole chain when storing CO2? Then 'sustainable' too - NRC
n his column CO storage delays the energy transition (26/11) Martijn Katan
takes a stand against the storage of CO" in empty North Sea gas fields. He writes that this
technique has been tried worldwide, but mostly it would have failed. Just
further on it appears that most of Air Liquide's CO
can be captured and stored underground.
Katan accuses proponents of CO storage of "mainly looking at what CO
itself and [to] ignore the stages preceding it". Katan lists the
emissions released at all stages of oil and natural gas extraction, up to and including
transportation. No, then the energy transition with nuclear power plants, wind and solar, which he calls "CO-
free sources"! True, the sun shines for free, the wind always blows. But the
conversion of these into electrons is not CO'-free. Again, this involves energy-intensive
mining, global transportation and conversion of raw materials into products,
infrastructure and in construction. The construction of a nuclear power plant takes 15 years, for
the energy consumption during construction, and the huge amounts of steel and concrete, are used
fossil fuels are used.
Footprints are everywhere. A scratch example is the electric car, The disappointments
will be great, because probably the carbon footprint of the electric
vehicle is larger than that of the gasoline car. In accordance with the Katan method with CO' storage.
counts material consumption throughout the chain: mining, steel production, rubber, plastics and
numerous special materials such as copper, cobalt, neodymium, lithium, nickel, textiles and
global transportation from factory to customers. The share of fuel in the
material balance of a car is 15 to 20 percent; if we include the entire infrastructure of
road transport, it becomes 2 percent. Environmental and climate damage are long
on the way when the car is in the showroom.
How sustainable?
Wouter van Dieren is an environmental expert. He was co-founder of sustainability forum
Springtij and is a member of the Club of Rome.
A version of this article also appeared in the December 3, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/bij-co2-opslag-naar-de-hele-keten-kijken-dan-ook-bij-duurzaam-a4150275 2/2

