= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
NEWS
Plastic plant in Antwerp port will
there after all, despite concerns about
Dutch nature
Nitrogen emissions Britain's Ineos will still get a permit to build a
plastic factory in the port of Antwerp, despite concerns about nitrogen precipitation in
Dutch nature.
Martin Kuiper, Milo van Bokkum 9January 2024 Reading Time 2 minutes
Listening (d) Reading List A
 |
-t
mer
mn
INEOS
 
WS
BD
 
fem
Eg jn
ie
®
At
 
4
"a
 
-
iin wd
e ij È KA 1
he. x/ ita and Kk ú akde ME ALONE
vOrIG GIL NeXrLLL KILL VVS V hadde" ) LLL L VUUYY Val rr rU
t British Ineos wants vqor 4 billion euros a \astic!
 
gbrie to be built in the port of Antwerp.
port of Antwerp. Last year, the VEEG Oo the sti
 
Kstot emissions p
Photo Peter Hilz/ANP
 of the project after the Dutch provinces of Zeeland and North
Brabant objected.
Britain's Ineos wants to build a large plastic plant in the
port of Antwerp. The project is controversial: Antwerp and Flanders
see an investment that will create hundreds of jobs and strengthen the position of the
Antwerp port strengthened. Opponents such as environmental organizations, however, are
critical of the intention to produce more new plastic, rather than to
recycling. They also fear the effects on nature of nitrogen emissions from the
plant.
Read also
Dutch nitrogen objections put
billion-dollar project at port of Antwerp halted
North Brabant and Zeeland joined in 2022 in a major procedure against
the permit for the company. This is because nitrogen emissions from the project would also precipitate in
Netherlands, on the hilly forest area De Brabantse Wal near
Bergen op Zoom. The consequences for this nature reserve, already overburdened by
nitrogen, would not have been sufficiently mapped, according to the provinces. The
Belgian court went along with this in August 2023 and ruled that better
explained that the impact on nature would be limited.
 Ratcliffe then threatened in interviews, among other things, to halt the entire
project. He also questioned whether Europe wanted "a chemical sector at all" anymore.
have. The Flemish government guaranteed the Briton that a new
permit would be forthcoming. It also guaranteed hundreds of millions of euros
in bank financing, because after the license fell through, lenders
would not simply extend more credit for the project.
The new permit was issued last Sunday, after which on Monday the
construction work resumed immediately on Monday. The Flemish government pointed out that
Ineos had now better demonstrated that the nitrogen effects of the project will be
will be minimal, Also, within ten years the company must
made climate neutral. On Friday evening, a key advisory body
of the government had already given a positive opinion on the permit application.
'Hallucinatory' ruling
Nevertheless, the decision can count on much criticism. Mieke Schauvliege,
Flemish member of Parliament for Green, speaks of a "hallucinatory" decision. "To the
permit nothing has essentially changed. It is: you ask, we turn." According to her
the condition to work climate-neutral within ten years was always in the
permit.
Gok several environmental organizations are critical: for example, it is already clear
that Mobilisation for the Environment (MOB), the Dutch foundation of Johan
 Vollenbroek, is going to object to the new permit, as are several
other organizations.
Noord-Brabant and Zeeland both say they are studying the permit.
"After that, Gedeputeerde Staten will consider any follow-up steps."
said the Zeeland spokesman.
Prior to the new permit, there were consultations between Flanders
and the Netherlands, says a spokesman for Flemish minister Demir. On December 13
December there was a meeting at the Dutch embassy in
Brussels. In attendance were Demir, the Dutch outgoing minister for Nitrogen
Christianne van der Wal (VVD), and deputies from the provinces were present.
Demir, according to her spokesperson, called there for cross-border
nitrogen conflicts should not be fought out in court.
Between the Netherlands and Belgium, the discussion on nitrogen has been hardening for some time.
Dutch provinces have repeatedly objected to projects just
across the Belgian border, such as some mega-stables near North Brabant.
Conversely, Belgium is annoyed that a concrete nitrogen approach in the Netherlands
remains absent: Belgium would also suffer from Dutch emissions.
Meanwhile, according to Demir, emissions from Belgium that precipitate in
Netherlands do decrease in the coming years. "We are a lot further ahead than the Netherlands," said
Demir told NRC in November. She hopes the nitrogen approach in Flanders will begin in
2024 will begin. "In terms of nitrogen approach, the Netherlands is nowhere at all."
 Read also
Still no forced buyout of
farms and manure processors in Flanders
A version of this article also appeared in the Jan. 10 2024 newspaper.
Share °% Mail the editors
BELGIUM
Grim atmosphere at farmers' protests in Brussels
February 26, 2024
Driver in Ghent kills two cyclists
February 25, 2024
 Write
 
for the newsletter
Í 'Inside Information'
Economy editors take you through the (
discussions they have on the editorial staff
about current developments
About NRC My NRC Contact
NRC Websites
nic)
NRC Media House
About us Take an editorial
Working at subscription Opinion editors
NRC Careers
NRC Webshop
Copyright Login The ombudsman
Privacy Create an account Imprint
NRC Readers Fund
Delivery terms Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC-Code My reading list Customer service
Our app My subscriptions Family announcements
Archive Service & Delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
 
