= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
NEWS
Provinces don't always have to act
against farmers without nitrogen permits,
says Council of State
PAS notifiers Environmental movement Mobilisation for the Environment had filed cases
brought cases against several provinces to enforce nature regulations.
enforcement. By mid-2025, provinces do have to start enforcing.
Flóri Hofman 28february2024 Reading time
 
1 minute
Listening (d) Reading List A
 Sr di
A dairy farm in the Overijssel town of Markelo.
reporters. That is what the Council of State has ruled in a case of P
 Photo Eric Brinkhorst
environmental organization Mobilisation for the Environment (MOB) against various
provinces, which revolved around three PAS reporters, However, provinces must properly
argue that there is a "reasonable balance" between the interests of the
companies on the one hand and nature on the other. As of mid-2025, the
State Council, provinces must start enforcing the law.
PAS reporters are organizations, mostly farms, that between 2015 and
2019 reported an expansion or change to their farm under
the then existing Program Approach to Nitrogen (PAS). That program regulated that
these farms did not have to apply for a nature permit at the time when
their nitrogen deposition rate remained below a certain value. In 2019, the Council of
of State ruled that the PAS was in violation of European legislation protecting Natura2000-
areas is supposed to protect.
As a result of the 2019 ruling, thousands of companies were at once formally operating
illegally and risked fines. Still one of the most complicated
parts of the state's nitrogen file. It has so far hardly succeeded
to help the illegally operating companies, partly because there is little
nitrogen space from discontinued farmers to be given away to companies without a
permit. In order not to put PAS reporters in acute trouble, many
many provinces not to enforce nitrogen rules.
'Pressure on cabinet'
 Mobilization for the Environment filed lawsuits against several provinces
lawsuits to enforce that they did enforce the nature rules.
The organization was proven right in May 2022 in Overijssel, resulting in dozens of
farmers threatened substantial nitrogen fines. The case on which the Council of State
ruled on Wednesday involved three cases: a biocentre in Balkbrug and a
dairy farm in Kampen, both in Overijssel, and a meat processor in the
IJsselstein in Utrecht.
With Wednesday's ruling, the highest administrative court deviated from the
court in Overijssel. According to Johan Vollenbroek, chairman of MOB, the
ruling "puts pressure on the cabinet" to solve the problems with the PAS notifiers by no later than
2025. "This is never going to succeed for a right-wing cabinet," he said.
Read also
Besides the 2,500 already known farmers bump
possibly thousands of other agricultural companies
Are also illegally emitting nitrogen
Share 9 Mail the editors Z
AGRICULTURE AND STOCKBREEDING
 The company 'Gebroeders C. en K. Kievit' is no more.
Oh well, what gives?
11 hours ago
EL
 
nnen
 
el ED EN and En nn
Î Î
Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture no weakening
15 hours ago
My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take One
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About NRC
Working At
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©)
 
