= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
BACKGROUND
Cabinet's nitrogen approach leads
hardly leads to more 'healthy' wildlife habitat
Unhealthy nature Measures such as buying out peak farmers are helping to
counteract nitrogen, but they hardly change the proportion of overburdened natural areas
little change.
Eppo König 28februari2024 Reading time 3 minutes
Listening Reading List A
 P
2030 in only 1 percentage point of Natura 2000 areas to enough
. . . . . Photo Robin Utrecht / ANP
improvement. The decrease in nitrogen deposition in these sensitive natural areas
 will be largely due to cleaner industry and cleaner
traffic in neighboring countries.
These are conclusions from the first evaluation of the nitrogen approach by the
Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL), the National Institute for Public Health
and Environment (RIVM) and Wageningen University. Co-author Henk van Zeijts of the
PBL called the nitrogen results "not a
cheerful message" and "not very stimulating." "There is really a lot of work to
to be done," Van Zeiits said.
Not easy to measure
A remarkable conclusion is that the effect of recent nature measures
is actually not easy to track. Data from provinces is often "not available
and/or not usable," the report states. And there is "no coherent overview
available of measures in Natura 2000 areas and their effects."
Van Zeijts: "It is a disturbing observation that the provision of information is
is so fragmented"
This report is mainly about the specific effects of nitrogen measures, according to
PBL, and concrete statements can be made about those.
Nitrogen emissions from agriculture (ammonia), industry and traffic
(nitrogen oxides) affect the soil and put animal and plant species under pressure.
 The exceedance of the nitrogen standard has been declining for years, but is still too high in
about 70 percent of the more than 160 protected Natura 2000 areas. The
proportion of vulnerable areas below the nitrogen standard (DNR) must increase to
at least 40 percent by 2025, 50 percent by 2035 and 74 percent by 2035.
These legal targets are unachievable within ten years, a report earlier this week revealed.
from a report. Between 2021 and 2030, the proportion of "healthy" natural areas will
barely increase. From 28 to 31 percent (instead of the targeted 40
percent), is the expectation. Thereby, only 1 percentage point of improvement is thus attributable
attributable to the effect of the Dutch nitrogen measures.
Farmers protest
That nitrogen targets have fallen further out of reach is partly because
the nitrogen standard or KDW itself has been tightened. It is also because the
nitrogen approach has become bogged down in political debate and farmer protest: part
of the measures has not yet been worked out into regulations and subsidies. And the
nitrogen is falling, but still remains well above the standard in many natural areas,
leaving the percentage of "healthy," areas barely increasing.
The knowledge institutes have investigated the effect of various
measures that have already been taken. For example, the speed limit on freeways
has been lowered from 130 to 100 kilometers per hour, and more money has been made available for the
ending pig farms and cleaner technical innovation. There were
 schemes for buying out farmers and large nitrogen emitters, the
peak loaders, with a total of nearly 1,290 applications received.
The good news is that the exceedance of nitrogen precipitation in Natura
2000 areas will fall by a third until 2030. But only 25
percent due to the Dutch government's nitrogen approach. The
bulk of the expected dating (45 percent) comes from cleaner
economic policies in Germany, Belgium and France, for example - and is uncertain,
The remaining 30 percent comes from other policies, such as the elimination of the
broader manure standards for the Netherlands.
3,000 jobs
The nitrogen approach does have economic and social
consequences, the researchers describe. As a result of the buy-out schemes
employment in the livestock industry is expected to fall by 3,000
jobs (6 to 7 percent). Among both farmers and
conservationists, the nitrogen approach has led to much distrust in the government
led.
Furthermore, the nitrogen approach has not led to easier
licensing for businesses. For the group of PAS reporters, aggrieved
farmers who are waiting for a nature permit to legally farm, there is
still no solution. Housing construction has not been "locked down," as was
 feared, but major infrastructure projects are largely at a standstill because of
the lingering nitrogen problem.
The government can improve the nitrogen approach with still underused
measures, the researchers advise. Reducing protein in the rations
of dairy cattle, for example, leads to less ammonia in their feces. A
sustainable farm management and technical innovation such as cleaner barns could
also be able to help. The industrial and transportation sectors will also have to become cleaner
become cleaner, but their share of the nitrogen problem is smaller.
Another piece of advice, the study found, is that politicians and administrators should set realistic
formulate ambitions in the long-term approach to nitrogen. Van Zeijts: "You
shouldn't want everything everywhere. That is not possible either. Purely in terms of implementation it is
difficult."
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 29, 2024 newspaper.
Share 9% Mail the editor
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
 Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture not a watering down
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest
milk
21 hours ago
About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Take an Editorial Mediahouse NRC
Work at subscription Opinion editorial NRC Careers
Copyright Login The Ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create an account Colophon NRC Readers' Fund
Delivery terms Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My Reading List Customer Service
Our app My subscriptions Family reports
Archive Service & Delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©)
 
