12/10/22, 10:06 AM Nitrogen reduction means sweeping redesign of farmland - NRC
Oee
Nitrogen reduction means
a radical
redesign of the
farmland
Nitrogen The cabinet took a first step Friday in its drastic
approach to nitrogen: it is now clear how much the emissions must fall
per area and province. But how that should happen is still
completely open.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/10/stikstofreductie-betekent-een-ingrijpende-herinrichting-van-het-boerenland-a4133152 1/5
 12/10/22, 10:06 AM Nitrogen reduction means sweeping redesign of farmland - NRC
Tackling nitrogen will lead to a radical redesign of agriculture and
the landscape in the Netherlands. That's the tough message the cabinet delivered Friday,
along with targets to reduce nitrogen in areas and provinces by 2030. Five
questions and answers about the nitrogen approach:
1
Why does the Netherlands have a nitrogen problem?
Nitrogen is in the air around us and in itself is not harmful. But
nitrogen compounds do harm humans and the environment, such as ammonia (nitrogen
and hydrogen) and nitrogen oxides (nitrogen and oxygen). Ammonia comes mainly from
evaporated manure moisture, nitrogen oxides from emissions from traffic and industry.
Since 1990, nitrogen emissions in the Netherlands have been more than halved. But the
concentration still seriously affects nature: soil acidification, plant and
tree species disappear, the number of insects, birds and animals decreases.
Also read:
How Rutte IV has to clean up its own legacies
The government continued to issue permits for livestock farms or construction of
roads, in anticipation of the future reduction of nitrogen. But in 2019
the Council of State ruled that this violated European nature legislation: the
ruling led to a construction freeze and affected 18,000 projects.
Since then, the government has been treading legal "goat trails" to allow polluting activities
to allow polluting activities, on the heels of environmental action group MOB taking legal action -.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/10/stikstofreductie-betekent-een-ingrijpende-herinrichting-van-het-boerenland-a4133152 2/5
 12/10/22, 10:06 AM Nitrogen reduction means sweeping redesign of farmland - NRC
and wins. To restore nature, to grant regular permits, the
cabinet now intervenes.
À
What will the cabinet do to reduce nitrogen emissions?
The Cabinet is allocating over 24 billion euros through 2035 to tackle nitrogen
plus the improvement of nature, water and climate. By 2030, three-quarters of the
total of 162 protected nature areas (Natura 2000) should no longer deteriorate due to
nitrogen. Friday, Minister Christianne van der Wal (Nature and Nitrogen, VVD) and
Minister Henk Staghouwer (Agriculture, ChristenUnie) took a first step: the cabinet
announced by what percentage the emission of nitrogen per area must be reduced by 2030.
decreased. In consultation with the provinces, by the middle of next year it must be determined what these
goals are AND how they are to be achieved.
3
Why does one area have to reduce more emissions than the
other?
A logical answer is: one area emits more nitrogen than the
other - especially in regions with a lot of ranchers or a lot of industry. At the provincial level
rural Limburg stands out, which needs to reduce nitrogen emissions by 52 percent
reduction. In an agricultural region like Gelderse Vallei, emissions must fall by 58 percent
decrease; 80 percent in barns and 18 percent in pasture areas. In a large number
protected nature areas emissions must even be reduced by 95 percent. The government
has factored more issues into the nitrogen targets. Such as: the state and proximity of
nature, the suitability of the soil and water for agricultural use, and whether
areas are centrally located or not. This makes the task much smaller for remote,
suitable agricultural land in Zeeland, North Holland, Flevoland and Groningen and
Friesland.
4
How should nitrogen be reduced in these regions?
That is the big question. The government has now only quantified preliminary targets. It
It is up to the provinces to come up with plans, and eventually achieve the standards. All
sectors must contribute "proportionally" to the reduction. Nitrogen oxide emissions,
which spread widely as a "rural blanket," come from traffic, agriculture,
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/10/stikstofreductie-betekent-een-ingrijpende-herinrichting-van-het-boerenland-a4133152 3/5
 12/10/22, 10:06 AM Nitrogen reduction means sweeping redesign of farmland - NRC
air and shipping et cetera. In the case of ammonia,
which is deposited in the environment, agriculture is
is 85 percent responsible. Clearly
thus that the approach will lead to a dramatic
downsizing of farms.
Minister Van der Wal on Friday confirmed an
estimate that the livestock population will shrink by about 30 percent
will shrink. Some of the farmers will have to make the
transition to sustainable,
innovative "circular agriculture" - if they
are able to invest and farm profitably.
Another part will have to move or stop voluntarily or via expropriation.
move or stop.
5
Are these drastic measures unavoidable?
According to the cabinet, yes. "I think it is inevitable that we make these choices now
make," Prime Minister Mark Rutte said Friday. Regardless of the goal - restoration and preservation
of nature - the Netherlands is in a legal pinch. Something has to happen to
meet European obligations, the targets for nitrogen reduction are legally
and in the coalition agreement. Making agriculture and industry more sustainable is
also necessary to comply with a climate-neutral Netherlands in 2050. On the other hand
there is much resistance from agriculture, the construction industry and the right-wing opposition and
there are major question marks about the feasibility. Minister Van der Wal parried
Friday all critical press questions with dogged optimism: "I am convinced that
we can do this together," she said.
Read also:
Buying out farmers seems inevitable, 'this is how you break
our sector"
The plans of the cabinet come "hard in" to farmers and horticulturists, writes
farmers' organization LTO on its website. The plans lead to an "unrealistic clearance of
the countryside," in which the responsibility, according to LTO chairman Sjaak van der Tak, "will be put
the provinces' shoes".
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/10/stikstofreductie-betekent-een-ingrijpende-herinrichting-van-het-boerenland-a4133152 4/5
 12/10/22, 10:06 AM Nitrogen reduction means sweeping redesign of farmland - NRC
Farmers' collective Agractie announced Friday morning, even before the announcement of the
cabinet plans, announced that there will be demonstrations with tractors in The Hague on June 22. The
group speaks of "premeditated murder" of "farms and the future of
farming families."
Trade association Bouwend Nederland speaks of a "bold plan" for "necessary
restoration" of nature in the Netherlands, but also that "no room has been built in for the
licensing needed in the short term for new economic
developments."
Environmental organization Greenpeace believes that after years of "procrastination " the cabinet is finally presenting a plan
that "hopefully" saves nature and makes housing development possible.
By Martin Kuiper
A version of this article also appeared in the June 11, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/10/stikstofreductie-betekent-een-ingrijpende-herinrichting-van-het-boerenland-a4133152 5/5

