= Menu MEC)" WD Mining news dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital newspaper Q
COMMENT
By choosing to delay, Brussels is doing the
farmers no service
Brake on greening
8February 2024 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening 1) Reading List U
This is NRC's daily commentary. It contains opinions, interpretations and choices.
They are written by a group of editors, selected by the
editor-in-chief. In the commentaries, NRC shows what it stands for. Commentaries
offer the reader a handle, an angle, it is "first aid" to the news of the
day.
he necessary greening of European agriculture was this week
dealt another blow. Last week, when farmers took to the streets of
EU summit set the streets of Brussels ablaze, the
European Commission already decided to roll back unpopular measures, including
 in the area of nature conservation. On Tuesday, another major knee-jerk
made, meaning that reducing pesticides in agriculture will take longer
take longer. Concrete targets for emissions reductions in agriculture appear to have
moreover, to have been removed from new climate plans.
Read also
With buckling knees, Brussels presents a
new climate target
It raises the question whether the commission is still able to do what it is on
Earth: acting in the European interest. Commission President Von der Leyen
seems to have her head rather with the European elections in June, and with her
European People's Party (EPP). The European Christian Democrats see themselves as
guardians of the peasant interest, but polls do not provide sufficient assurance that
they can maintain that role, due to the rise of the radical right and of new
(peasant) parties. And so it rains concessions, while the current European
agricultural policy really needs a shake-up. Nowhere is this more evident than in
Netherlands, where industrial, intensive livestock farming in particular weighs heavily on
society and causes a chain reaction of problems. The
nitrogen problems lead to problems in construction, at a time of great
housing shortage. The pollution of water and soil makes the Netherlands less livable.
A popular analysis reads: the agricultural reforms in the Green Deal are not
realistic, and therefore it is good that the ambitions are somewhat lowered. But once upon a time
 those ambitions were more realistic. Through endless procrastination, they have become unrealistic
become. For years, the Netherlands itself did not want to fully
want to implement them, so the problems are now much bigger and the solutions are
indeed much more radical. MP and former dairy farmer Harm Holman (NSC)
had the courage last week to call for a smaller livestock, because this would
can solve a lot of other problems. An analysis that rings true
but which immediately brought him serious threats. Well-intentioned
farmers who are willing to help think of solutions deserve every support.
support. That happens far too little, and unfortunately Von der Leyen is now setting a bad
example, by listening too much to farmers blocking highways and choosing a
road that has turned out to be a dead end for the Netherlands: that of postponement.
Read also
Also in Brussels: the tractors appear, so
the green plans disappear
Last week a rule went on hold to promote biodiversity:
farmers would be required this year - for the first time, after earlier postponements - to set aside 4
percent of their farmland to be left fallow. On Tuesday, Von der
Leyen withdrew an entire bill, which was supposed to lead to halving the use of
pesticides should have resulted. An unusual move: the Commission
almost never withdraws proposals, in order to keep open the possibility of further
negotiations open.
 That road is now closed, despite overwhelming evidence that pesticides
can be harmful, not least to farmers themselves. Von der Leyen
defends the decision, arguing that the pesticides law, which was already
was rejected by the European Parliament, only encourages polarization.
works. What the EU boss has shown above all, however, is that polarization pays off, and that
with roadblocks, arson and pitchforks the desired result can be achieved
can be achieved.
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 8, 2024 newspaper.
Share Mail the editor
COMMENT xFollow @
The Marengo trial should open eyes:
The Netherlands has become a narco-state
14 hours ago
A Chinese malaise also affects the rest of the world
1 day ago
SN
AT
tex
 
er fenmas [)
Le" er,
DNS
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About NRC
Working At
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

