12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before massive protests against nitrogen policy arise in Flanders as well' - NRC
Note: Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
11:04
Reportage
'A matter of time
before also in
Flanders massive
protests against the
nitrogen policy arise'
Nitrogen protest As in the Netherlands, Belgian
farmers must sharply reduce their nitrogen emissions. Concerns about the
consequences for the sector are increasing, as is resistance.
E
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-beschermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 1/7
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before massive protests against nitrogen policy arise in Flanders as well' - NRC
On sopping sandals, goat farmer Renaat Devreese (59) walks through the wet, tall grass
towards a part of his land that could end up costing him dearly. He
points to the plot edges that he has demarcated with a kilometer of "wood edges and
hawthorn hedges." Looks nice, and the plantings serve as a buffer
against overflowing pesticides and fertilizer from a neighbor who is not like him
organic farming. Further along, he dug two ponds. All kinds of reeds now grow around them.
Devreese believes: your farm should exude the same quality as your product. So when he
35 years ago he took over the farm of a retired couple in the West Flemish coastal village of De
Haan, he first started to beautify the place. Until then, in the wide
surrounding area was nothing but grassland. Over the years, an area of ten hectares
large where species thrived. The farm continued to grow. Initially
Devreese had thirty goats; now there are three hundred. They graze in semi-open stalls.
Because Devreese has an organic farm, he is not allowed to close off his stables from the
outside. That couldn't hurt, he thought, because goat farm 't Reigershof
is not near a protected nature reserve. But when he recently used an
online calculation tool of the Flemish government to look at his "mpact score," he got the
scare of his life.
It turned out that the piece of land he created himself had been designated, without his knowledge, as
a so-called "search zone. That is an area that the Flemish government keeps in option
for the realization of a protection area in the future, should it be necessary to
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-beschermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 2/7
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before massive protests against the nitrogen policy arise in Flanders as well' - NRC
achieve nitrogen targets. "Apparently people have been on my land who have
seen certain grasses and species that are not there elsewhere," says Devreese
indignant. "All of a sudden we are less than a kilometer from a nature reserve
that only got there because of our way of farming. If this is officially designated as a
protected area, we may have to go back to two hundred
goats. Then everything will fall apart?" Because with a third loss of revenue, his farm is no longer
no longer profitable.
Uncertain future
Renaat Devreese is not the only farmer in Flanders with his hands in his pockets.
Since the Flemish government issued a final version of the
Programmatic Approach to Nitrogen (PAS) reached agreements that some sectors
(chickens, pigs) require a nitrogen reduction of 60 percent by 2030, the future
of thousands of farmers is uncertain. As in the Netherlands, Flemish farmers are therefore taking to the
the streets to protest the nitrogen policy. This Wednesday evening, a
large demonstration planned along several highways (although Belgian farmers
are not planning to block those highways themselves for now). The Flemish farmers
also want to use their action to show Dutch farmers that they "are not alone."
they report in a press release.
Also read this article about
previous farmers' protests in Brussels
As in the Netherlands, the Flemish government has also been working on a PAS for years. The Netherlands and
Belgium are the undisputed leaders in that order when it comes to nitrogen emissions.
Nowhere else is so much livestock kept in such a small area. Agriculture is
responsible for over 53 percent of total nitrogen emissions in Flanders -
nitrogen oxides and ammonia.
Research has shown that both Dutch and Flemish nature are in a state of excessive
high nitrogen precipitation is causing respiratory distress. The Flemish Environment Agency calculated that
at 80 percent of the protected nature areas in Flanders the critical
threshold has been exceeded. In only three of the 64 areas is the situation favorable.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-beschermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 3/7
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before massive protests against nitrogen policy arise in Flanders as well' - NRC
Letter on the mat
Already in 2015, farms in Flanders received a letter on the doormat stating their
impact score on nearby nature reserves was stated. Colors were used
worked with colors; with a green letter, up to 5 percent impact, a farmer could expand, with orange -
up to 50 percent - expansion was impossible. And farmers who were 50 percent or more
were responsible for nitrogen impacts on a natural area, once a permit had
expiration of a permit, no new one would be granted.
With a green letter in his hand, Gunter Klaasen (43) therefore dared in 2015
to give up his well-paying job in ict, get rid of his self-built house and
and, together with his wife Daisy, took over his father's farm.
He became the fourth generation of Klaasen to run a farm on the Arendonksesteenweg in Ravels, near
the border with the Netherlands, to farm. Green meant permission
to expand, so Klaasen took out a 2 million euro loan to build two new
barns. In the roof, he had a costly low ammonia emission system
in the roof. Despite tens of thousands of extra chickens - he now has 124,000 - his
nitrogen emissions did not go up as a result.
At home at the kitchen table, Klaasen, dressed in
a black shirt with "RED THE BOER" on his chest,
the permit for the expansion, while
Daisy stands behind him cooking rice with chicken
frying. The last letter was dated January 2020.
It took more than a year, but then there were
two brand new stalls next to two old
copies. The stables were barely in
in use when the nitrogen problem in
Flanders gained momentum.
A chicken barn near Hasselt was
no permit to expand after a
nature organization successfully
challenged. A judge ruled that the impact
on nearby nature was too great. The
Farmer Gunter Klaasen from Ravels wants support
Flemish omgevi ini ir (N-
aam environment minister Zuhal Demir (N-VA) for farmers affected by the Belgian PAS-
announced no overall license freeze, as agreement.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-beschermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 A{T
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before massive protests against nitrogen policy arise in Flanders as well' - NRC
happened in the Netherlands in 2019 after a ruling Photo Nick Somers ta
of the Council of State, but demanded that new
agricultural permits could only be issued if zero additional
nitrogen emissions would occur.
The crocus agreement
The revised version of the PAS, the so-called "crocus agreement" last February,
meant the end of a life's work for some farmers; 41 farms ended up
on a red list as "peak farmers" and must close their farms by 2025 at the latest. More
than a hundred orange farmers are being offered a way out with a buyout scheme. Especially
the area where Gunter Klaasen lives and works is a nitrogen hotspot.
The new PAS will also make it virtually
impossible to expand. The threshold for ammonia emissions is so low that almost all
farms will either have to make investments to drastically
down, or have to significantly reduce the amount of livestock before 2030.
For example, the number of pigs, nearly 6 million in Flanders, must be reduced by 30
percent by 2030, for example.
Flanders is allocating 3.6 billion euros to pay for the nitrogen dossier. In the Netherlands,
three times as big, it is 25 billion. The big difference between the two nitrogen agreements
is, according to David De Pue, researcher at the Flemish Institute for Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food Research, that in the Netherlands "area-oriented thinking is used, rather than
per farm". De Pue sees that the Netherlands also immediately wants to address soil and groundwater quality
want to address. That comes later in Flanders.
In April, a fuss arose all the way to the Flemish parliament, when it appeared that companies
had ended up on the red list that were not yet red in 2015. Especially from the
threatened closure of the centuries-old Averbode Abbey, which in 2015 still received a
license to expand, was disgraced in the Flemish media. There
mistakes would have been made in determining the reference year.
Emotional scenes
But Minister Demir refused to tamper with the agreement. Over the past few weeks she
with Flemish farmers. Two weeks ago this led to
emotional scenes in Merksplas. Hundreds of farmers let her know that the
uncertainty about the PAS is starting to become unbearable for them. To one of the
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-beschermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 5/7
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before massive protests against the nitrogen policy arise in Flanders as well' - NRC
tractors they had come with, a noose was attached with her name on it.
Since then, the minister has had permanent police protection.
Until June 17, all Flemish people could, as part of
of a public inquiry through the municipalities
object to the PAS. Thousands did
that. But the question is whether those objections will be
anything will be done. Demir wants the PAS to be
fall to be enacted into law. In the Netherlands
need not be established before next July how
the provinces want to reduce their nitrogen emissions.
reduction.
Because of the Flemish PAS, chicken farmer Gunter
Klaasen has his back against the wall. If he has to invest in his
two older houses, he will have to invest
ammonia emissions, he will have to
expand to get out of debt. And that
is not allowed. He is at his wit's end. Last year
he took a death blow when he fell from a metre-high
Devreese.
ladder. With a hollow look, "I also had my
Photo Nick Somers ta
neck. Then I would have been off
been"
Klaasen joined the Dutch farmers' protest in Stroe last Wednesday. In
early morning, he and eight colleagues drove by tractor to Gelderland. He felt it was his
duty. On the way, except for one middle finger, he encountered only clapping people,
he says. He fills up when he thinks back to the "Dutch collegiality." "In
Flanders we do not yet realize what is hanging over our heads. In the Netherlands we do" He
thinks this is because of the BoerBurger Movement and "more objective media." In Flanders
he believes the farmer is portrayed as the big bad. If he had
had known this in advance, he would never have become a farmer seven years ago.
Klaasen recently joined a steering committee with which he prepares protest actions. He has
"meanwhile" by mail and phone regular contact with members of Farmers Defense
Force. He assures: it is only a matter of time before also in Flanders
are massive protests against the nitrogen policy.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-beschermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 6/7
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before also in Flanders massive protests against the nitrogen policy arise' - NRC
A version of this article also appeared in the June 30, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-beschermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 7IT

