= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
NEWS
In addition to the 2,500 already known farmers
may be emitting thousands of other
farms are also illegally emitting nitrogen
from
Nature permits Possibly thousands of farms have not applied for the required
environmental permits. Legalization will be difficult.
Martin Kuiper, Milo van Bokkum 29 August2023 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening (d) Reading List A
 wp S
Ke
thousands - agricultural businesses without such a nature permitteoweffkerGionndatg/ANP/Hollandse Hoogte
 For the 2,500 farmers who previously had permission for their nitrogen emissions
under the Programme Approach to Nitrogen (the PAS notifiers), the government is looking for
a solution. Because the Council of State ruled in 2019 that the PAS improperly
wrongly anticipated future nitrogen reductions, the emissions of the
affected farmers are in fact illegal.
Read also
The state is going to help 259 farms without
permit after all
Now it turns out another large group of farms do not have a permit. They
were already active before new European legislation in February 2009 forced them to
to apply for an environmental permit. Many did not do so, sometimes
advice of the province. This group is known to governments as "interim workers.
Provinces and central government point to each other for a solution.
Wide margin
The existence of the "interim workers" is well known in the agricultural world and in
politics, but has so far received little attention. On the size of
the group no one has clear insight, because a central national
licensing system is lacking. In 2014, the Noordelijke Rekenkamer estimated the
number in Drenthe alone at over a thousand companies, and in Friesland at 250 to
400. The province of Drenthe is reviewing whether those figures "are still current," says a
 spokesperson. Friesland says it is possible that "a number" of farmers
do now have the proper permit.
Environmental and health institute RIVM estimates that the interimrmers are responsible
are responsible for far more nitrogen precipitation than the PAS reporters, It does use
an extremely wide margin. In the extreme case, one fifth of the precipitation on
sensitive nature come from interim reporters.
As with the PAS reporters, the government is looking for an
possibility of legitimizing their nitrogen emissions via the issuance of a permit.
permit. With the strict European conditions for nitrogen emissions at
sensitive nature, this is very complicated.
More than once the impression has been given that the interim farmers would get national help
help. State Secretary Sharon Dijksma (Economic Affairs, PvdA) wrote to the
Lower House in 2014 that the national government should help the group "given the national
nature" of the problem, rather than "that each province individually
", As did former minister Johan Remkes (VVD), who, at the request of the
Rutte IV cabinet to look into the nitrogen problem, also advised last year that the
national government should help legalize these farmers,
Responsibility
According to the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality (LNV), the
responsibility for interim farmers lies with the provinces. The Interprovincial
 Consultation (IPO), on the contrary, believes that the national government should "in principle" find a solution. The
advocate of the provinces additionally points to the farmers involved.
They must "provide the necessary nitrogen space themselves." Drenthe also argues that
if the province discovers a farm without a nature permit, the farm
must apply for one itself or "cease" its business activity,
According to the ministry, the responsibility lies with the
provinces. These point to the state and to the farmers themselves
Legalizing PAS reporters is a hugely difficult case in the nitrogen crisis.
This requires the nitrogen space from farmers who stop farming.
Then the national government can distribute that space. So far this has barely succeeded, because only
few farmers terminate their businesses. With the interim farmers, legalization seems even
even more difficult, because, according to RIVM, they probably deposit more nitrogen
on sensitive nature and thus require more nitrogen space.
The agricultural sector is counting on the government to solve the problems.
Farmers' interest group LTO sees PAS reporters and interim farmers as victims
of an unreliable government. During the consultation on the Agricultural Agreement
last year, agricultural organizations hammered on help from the government, according to
discussion notes from LNV.
 A version of this article also appeared in the Aug. 30, 2023, newspaper.
Email the editor M
Share 9
My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About us
Working at
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f © MO

