= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
BACKGROUND
Biodiversity as a commodity: is it going to
nature help?
Biodiversity credits After CO credits, there is a new promise: biodiversity credits.
Start-ups, banks and governments are working on a trading system to help nature
save. But there are pitfalls.
Wouter van Noort 12 Jan2024 Reading Time 6 minutes
Listening Reading List A
 very surprising that nature is being sacrificed. A living, healthy nature
after all, is not easily measurable. There is no short-term "product" of it
to make, you can't invest in it.
But perhaps that is changing.
 At least that is what Arnout Asjes, co-founder of Land Life, hopes for, His
company, with 75 employees, is recovering landscapes. It is picking up in
Spain, Australia and the U.S. to address deteriorated land, often parched or eroded,
by planting trees and improving the soil. But just try to
make money with that.
One way to finance that now is through carbon credits.
can buy those from a provider of the credits, who measures whether a
business activity GO, stores: for example, planting trees. Such a
issuer issues a credit so that people can invest in measurable
CO opstag in the future. That seems like a godsend for companies like Land Lite.
Because it plants trees that absorb CO, it can claim money from
the providers of credits.
But really, carbon credits allêên are not so suitable for what Land Life wants,
Asjes explains, "The work we do, especially in dry areas, is good for biodiversity.
biodiversity but provides relatively little carbon storage in the short term." From
Indeed, by nature there is little rainfall in the areas where Land Life is active, It
is mostly land on which vegetation grows slowly. "If we especially want a lot of CO,-
storage, we would have to work in Brazil or Congo," he says. In
those tropical countries, trees grow much faster, and therefore things go much faster
with CO,-storage. And so there is much more to be earned with CO,-credits.
But yes, even in countries where nature recovery is slower than in the tropics, there is
need for better ecosystems. The struggle of Land Life to get enough
 money for yet obviously important work is indicative of more companies
in ecosystem and landscape restoration, Even in countries where trees are slow
Even in countries where trees grow slowly, nature needs to be restored, but carbon credits do not
always lend themselves well to this. That makes it difficult to finance nature restoration,
That's why Asjes is looking with hope at a remarkable idea that has been emerging recently
If investments in CO
CO capture in a financial instrument, why not biodiversity as well?
not also? "That could create a better revenue model for nature restoration,
something there is a huge need for."
The idea is at least 20 years old, but due to technological developments and
growing political pressure on nature restoration, it is suddenly in the full
attention. All kinds of start-ups, banks and governments report being
into it. Dozens of companies are already offering nature credits. France and the
United Kingdom are making joint plans to create a market for
biodiversity credits. Also at the European Union and the United Nations
committees are working on it.
Could these kinds of financial instruments help to
save it? The promises are great, but experts point out major pitfalls. Four
questions.
1. How do biodiversity credits work?
 Credits are financial instruments that allow companies, individuals or
governments to invest in projects that measurably contribute to
biodiversity, Such a credit is a way to record where the
ecosystem restoration took place, who did it and what the effect
is.
An independent issuer of the credit verifies and measures the effect of
nature restoration, issues the credit, and shares the revenue from the credits with the
party doing the restoration. It is a way to prevent
lenders from having to trust nature restorers on their blue eyes: it
makes nature restoration quantifiable and tradable.
A biodiversity credit is thus an instrument to demonstrably invest in
nature restoration. And it can also be a way to invest upfront in the
returns from healthier ecosystems. Healthier ecosystems can
contribute, for example, to higher agricultural yields, ecotourism, higher
land prices.
Take a company that makes products with fruit, which therefore depends over time on
on healthy soils and enough bees to pollinate fruit trees, Such a company
has an interest in a biodiversity credit that contributes to healthy ecosystems.
Or take a seller of flower vases. It could offer its customers
buy biodiversity credits with the vase to indirectly ensure the availability of
wide flowers over time. The idea is that these kinds of credits can either
 can be voluntary or mandatory with certain purchases,
a bit like the carbon offsets that now apply to airline tickets, for example.
2. Who are they intended for?
Anyone can buy these credits: states that want to finance nature restoration,
philanthropists, companies and citizens who want to compensate for environmental damage or
volunteer to contribute to a healthier natural environment. You buy them from a
issuer of the credits, and they are also tradable, companies can sell them as
addition to products, etcetera.
Roland van der Vorst, top executive of Rabo Carbon Bank, a branch of Rabobank
which focuses on more nature-friendly agriculture, sees potential
applications in that sector. "Many agricultural practices have a bad impact
on biodiversity, That threatens not only the quality of life, but also the
agriculture itself" If biodiversity declines so there are fewer insects,
pollination and thus crop yields also decline, for example,
So a financial interest in biodiversity is already there, only there is no
standard way to invest in it. Indeed, there is a problem, Before
a healthier soil and environment translate into better crops, you are years
further. Van der Vorst: "If I make my house more sustainable, I immediately benefit financially: lower energy costs.
benefit immediately: lower energy costs. That is not the case with many agricultural practices'
The challenge where he believes biodiversity credits can help is
translating long-term biodiversity gains for the farmer into short-term financial gains.
 in the short term. This is in the research phase at Rabo, but Van der Vorst
expects that biodiversity credits will "almost certainly" become a more serious
instrument.
Sonny Duijn, biodiversity advisor at ABN Amro, says his bank is looking closely at the
possibilities of nature credits closely, but does not yet
trade in them yet. "For now, there are mostly fictitious examples of how they concretely
can work.
3. What are pitfalls?
According to both Van der Vorst and Duijn, the lack of a clear standard
for nature credits is now the biggest problem. In order to be
tradable, such a credit must be an undisputed unit, like the
dollar or the euro is. What a credit represents must be measurable,
comparable and somewhat stable. "That is difficult with biodiversity, because
biodiversity in the Achterhoek is very different from biodiversity in the Amazon," says Van der
Vorst.
What do you count alpha when you measure biodiversity? Fungi, bacteria, worms,
lichens? Or just plant species? There is, unlike CO, bitterly little
unanimity on how exactly to measure something as compiex as biodiversity. Such
such agreement is necessary to keep it verifiable whether a
biodiversity credit actually contributes to biodiversity.
 Read also
Our farmers let nature do
work'
Until now it was almost impossible to measure biodiversity properly, but thanks to
rapid technological developments that is changing, observes Arnout Asjes
of Land Life. His company is working on its own measurement methods, for example by dna-
analysis of soil samples. He is also optimistic about using cameras to
gather information about species diversity, for example, and about 'bio-
acoustics': techniques to hear what is swarming and
crawling and crawling. It helps that data analysis and pattern recognition are rapidly being improved
by artificial intelligence.
Rabo Carbon Bank is experimenting with satellite data to measure biodiversity.
Once there are reliable ways to measure biodiversity, parties can
sell credits.
Until then, it is difficult to arrive at a globally usable standard. And that is
necessary if a functioning global market for the credits is to emerge.
4, Are such credits really a solution?
The practice surrounding carbon credits does not reassure. The trade in CO credits is
accompanied by all sorts of perverse incentives that have negative ecological consequences.
In some countries, for example, carbon credits lead to monocultures. Then
 Many of the same types of trees are planted very quickly to store as much CO
as quickly as possible. In the Amazon, for example, countless rows of non-native
eucalyptus trees are planted in the Amazon by companies financed with money
earned from the sale of carbon credits. Eucalyptus trees grow
fast and store a lot of carbon dioxide. That makes them attractive to sell
sell carbon credits on. But landscapes full of eucalyptus are bad for
soil and biodiversity, and the trees burn like matchsticks in forest fires.
Carbon credits may contribute to carbon reduction, but they destroy local
ecosystems precisely,
Because of these perverse incentives, poor oversight and cowboy practices, there have been
many scandals surrounding carbon credits in recent years, as revealed by
research by The Guardian and other international newspapers last year revealed that 90
percent of the promised carbon offsets from Verra Carbon Standard, a major
provider, probably never took place.
According to Philippe Kónig, partner at law firm Houthoff, from the failures
with carbon credits provide clear lessons for biodiversity credits. He
is personally engaged in lobbying for the development of
biodiversity credits. Kónig emphasizes its promises for nature restoration, but
also identifies another risk: "For example, it would not be a good idea to use them
used only for offsetting" - compensation for damage. Suppose a
miner destroys an ecosystem, and buys it off with biodiversity credits
for ecosystem restoration eiders. König: "If they are used primarily in this way, nature doesn't gain anything on net.
nature gains nothing on net."
 To overcome such problems, the European
Commission is working on 'robust methodologies' to avoid repeating the mistakes made with carbon
carbon credits. This was announced by the top environmental official at the
EU, Florika Fink-Hooijer, announced last October.
Many conservation organizations also have double feelings about
biodiversity credits. By putting a monetary value on something as
priceless thing like nature, you reduce ecosystems back to a commodity. And
Wasn't that precisely the cause of all the mess? Shouldn't we get rid of all too economic
economic thinking instead of bringing nature within the economic models?
economic models?
Objections of principle or not, ways to trade biodiversity will certainly
will certainly increase in the coming years, according to those involved. The big question is
according to Roland van der Vorst of the Rabo Carbon Bank, whether that will happen with
a more or less global system, or whether it will mainly be smaller-scale
local credit systems will remain because of the large differences between
ecosystems.
Either way, it is high time for better ways to invest in biodiversity
Arnout Asjes of Land Life believes: "With the current pace of
nature restoration we are simply not going to make it."
A version of this article also appeared in the Jan. 13, 2024 newspaper.
 Share Mail the editors
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture not a watering down
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest
milk
21 hours ago
Write
 
subscribe to the newsletter
Í 'Inside Information'
Economics editors take you through the C
discussions they have on the editorial staff
 about current developments
My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
Editorial team
About NRC
Media house NRC
Work at
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family Reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN YW f © MO

