Greening farmland? ©"
Ho, ho, that's just not going to happen
Agroecological pioneers and nature restorers run into a wall of
rules and interests. This slows down the green transition quite a bit. "It's so frustrating
that I almost wonder if I want to continue with this.
 1 HE AA
\/
uf
M al
e
ee vene eee ee ee ee. .
DR 3 . . . Ld rn
" .' ee eere . ....
pl . e
vene tete
 
re Tee eee dt ded .*
 
à
Ld
/ SP
Animation Mart Veldhuis ta
Ö Wouter van Noort © 12february 2024 Ô Reading time
 
4 minutes
 Almost a year and a half ago Johannes Regelink started De Patrijs, an 'agro-ecological
citizen farm," on a piece of land near Lochem, Gelderland. On the site of a traditional
dairy farm, he wants to build a new kind of
farm that is better for soil, biodiversity and environment. From the ambition:
"in everything we do, we work with nature and let her work for us. We
provide healthy food and at the same time restore the soil, work on a rich biodiversity
biodiversity, make the landscape even mooter and connect people with their food."
Who could possibly be against that, you might think. The need for an agricultural transition is
evident, and the ecological crisis cries out for solutions, and thus for pioneers who are trying out new
ways of living and working. Right?
Well, there is a problem. Agroecological farms are often more labor intensive. The
Partridge, for example, works with strip farming instead of monocultures of one and the same
crop, and cows there have to graze on a different piece of land each time instead of always on
the same expansive piece of pasture. More hands are needed on the farmyard as a result, says
Regelink. "So it is actually necessary to live with more people on the farm than
with traditional farming"
And that is not allowed by the municipality. One farm belongs to one company house. The
Lochem municipality is at times quite willing to look for solutions,
Regelink says, but for over a year they have been unable to make any real progress.
"Extremely frustrating, and it also stands in the way of the necessary transition."
The story of The Partridge is not an isolated one, Everywhere in the Netherlands green pioneers run
up against a similar wall of rules, complexity, bureaucracy and sometimes
vested farming interests that thwart greening and more biodiverse landscapes.
 For example, Arno Feenstra: he bought a piece of farmland in Smallingerland, Friesland, in order to
turn it into a more natural landscape. "I want to connect it with nature reserve It Fryske
Gea, create more space for water, more types of planting. "But to his
great frustration, he now spends more time hassling with the municipality than restoring the
nature. "It's bizarre what happens to you. You get stuck in a tangle of rules and have to take a
long breath to get permission."
For example, he is not allowed to plant trees as a private citizen, whereas he probably
would have been allowed if he had a nursery. He must, before restoring nature on his
land, has to have expensive research done to see if the road that runs along his land is not causing too much
noise. "While It Fryske Gea starts literally on the other side of the road."
He runs into a wall of inflexible officials and complex rules. "So frustrating that
I almost wonder if I want to continue with this"
As much natural area as possible
Or take Ruurd Jelle van der Leij, who during corona turned a meadow in the Frisian town of Oldeholtpade
into a nature reserve, and now with his citizens' initiative Aanpoten.nu wants to do the same
do the same in many more places. "We want to create as many nature areas as possible," he says.
The before and after images of their transformed meadows regularly go viral on
social media, he joined talk shows to talk about the difference their
restoration work makes for nature and local residents. The work strikes a chord and contributes to
the green transition, you would think.
But the red carpet is certainly not being rolled out for them either: they are caught up in
zoning plans, permit applications (for projects involving more than forty
forty centimeters deep), other rules, procedures and waiting periods. That
 leads to being able to green much less than desired. "It is made incredibly difficult
made"
It varies from case to case where greening stalls: sometimes it is zoning plans
that are difficult to adapt, if at all. Sometimes it is vested interests of
surrounding farms, who want to thwart new ways of farming through the
municipality or standards committee. Sometimes it is completely unfathomable why first the
municipality, then the fire department, then the standards committee, then the province, and then neighbors.
then neighbors raise objections and obstacles. Municipalities usually cannot
not comment on ongoing individual cases.
Conflicting interests
At the same time, it is a real question whether it is a good idea to give everyone carte blanche
carte blanche to radically modify landscapes. Sometimes greening ambitions clash with
interests, such as the protection of cultural and historical heritage, or with
governments' agricultural strategies: sufficient agricultural land must be left for food production.
for food production.
Reality is complex, so it is not surprising that there are rules. But the common thread
thread is that for many of these pioneers, frustration runs so high that they have doubts about
realization of their greening ambitions. Van der Leij: "Several projects have already failed.
continued"
And there is ê one thing that Regelink, Van der Leij and Feenstra all three point out, one thing that
Moreover, it seems exemplary for the stagnation of many necessary transitions. Regelink:
"There is no vision of where we are going with our landscape."
 What does the community see as nature and what not, what future is there for intensive
agriculture, how to deal with the clashes between cultural history on the one hand and
sustainability on the other? And, not unimportantly, can biodiversity be
enhanced? There is no room for that conversation, it is rarely or never discussed in their contacts with the
It is the core of what they want to achieve.
Instead of offering a listening ear to new ideas about agriculture, nature and
landscape, municipalities and provinces are often stuck enforcing enormously complex
rules that date from another era, is their complaint. "If you really want to do something different
do something different, there is really no room for it," says Regelink.
What is missing above all, according to Arno Feenstra, is a basic level of trust in that
these pioneers want to do the right thing. "Surely you don't want a municipality to be so suspicious
toward its own citizens that any real experiment is stopped?"
In this column, four authors write about the dilemmas raised by the
major transitions in society and the economy by the need for
pioneers and the obstacles standing in their way.
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 13, 2024 newspaper.

