= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
NEWS
Brussels scraps even more environmental rules in
new guidance for farmers
European Commission The Commission wants, among other things, to reduce administrative burdens on
farmers. It is a response to farmers' protests. For the first time
the door ajar for more flexible manure rules.
Clara van de Wiel February 22, 2024 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening Reading List A
  
suggestedpfn Gearsnissiehavendiemiete to nillendaeraandalastendiee A67 off in both directions.
Ile At,
 
er
vk N
 
Photo Merlin Daleman
 
 result from the Nitrates Directive, which, among other things, means that farmers in
Netherlands are allowed to spread less manure.
The proposals presented Thursday are a response to the farmer protests
that broke out in several EU member states in recent months. Earlier this
month, the Commission already scrapped a biodiversity rule requiring farmers to leave
land fallow and withdrew a bill on halving
pesticide use altogether.
Now Brussels is proposing, among other things, to amend rules that deal with maintaining
sufficient permanent pasture. She also wants to look at a rule that would
require farmers to cover their soil during certain periods. In addition, the
Commission wants to cut the number of checks on farms by half and proposes
she proposes to change the definition of "force majeure," which farmers can invoke if they are unable to comply with certain rules in
exceptional circumstances cannot comply with certain rules, to
stretch.
Read also
Farmers get a reprieve, but European
agricultural challenge remains
More measures are likely to follow in the near future: in the coming
weeks, the Commission wants to ask farmers via an online platform directly under
which measures they are suffering the most.
 In doing so, Brussels also wants to explicitly ask about burdens arising from the
so-called Nitrates Directive, which aims to prevent water from becoming too heavily polluted.
Enforcement of that rule in the Netherlands was recently
tightened, resulting in farmers being allowed to spread less manure since this year.
spreading.
Letter from Mark Rutte
Now, for the first time, the Commission seems to be leaving the door ajar for a
possibly more flexible stance around the manure rules. In a letter, Prime Minister Mark
Rutte (VVD) asked Commission President Ursula von der Leyen only last week explicitly
to do something about the nitrate rules. Farmers are given until & March to share their grievances about
the manure rules with Brussels.
Relaxation of the manure rule would not be unique: over the past twenty years, the
Netherlands at several times an exception to the European rule,
At the end of 2022, that exception was withdrawn by Brussels, causing great unrest
among Dutch farmers.
"We are easing the administrative burden on our farmers to help them ensure the
ensure food security for European citizens," Von der Leyen said
Thursday in a statement. The relaxations cannot be separated from the
approaching European Parliament elections in early June. Protesting
farmers are an electoral risk for politicians. Also in France and
Belgium, politicians have also recently announced concessions to farmers.
 The proposals now presented will be discussed for the first time on Monday
during a consultation of agriculture ministers in Brussels. It is expected that there
broad support for the relaxations and that member states will even
urge the Commission to go a little further in making the rules more flexible.
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 23 newspaper 2024.
Share <6 Mail the editor
EUROPEAN UNION xFollow @
Online bank Revolut wants to challenge traditional banks
challenge - but is this ambition realistic?
9 hours ago
Sebastian Kurz and his shadowy Russians
10 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About us
Working at
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

