Menu MEC)" WD Mining News df} Podcasts [F| Digital Newspaper Q v
COLUMN CHRISTIAAN WEIJTS
Dust bubble
19juli2019 Reading time 1 minute
Reading list Jl
eater 24
Re i
TT et seems that Louis Napoleon still haha
seen, these tall oaks and beeches
_|at Amelisweerd. Do you think the hissing of the
Shall we
A27 away, then it might be like circa 1808 here. some nicer
Country houses, meadows and orchards, mirrored going
In the Kromme Rijn. with that barrel
In the battle between asphalt and nature, these trees are the
iconic front soldiers, already fighting since 1971 for
 their survival. This week they won an
important battle: the Council of State ruled that
hundreds of them do not have to make way for the
widening of the highway.
On the terrace of the teahouse, I spoke to Jos
Kloppenborg, of the Friends of Amelisweerd. As a
As a student he was involved in the very first resistance actions,
and later with the actions in 1978 and 1982. Hundreds of
Invest from €100,000 and
receive up to 5.25% fixed interest
activists then occupied the forest, in the wake of the pe
nationwide squatter riots, with tree houses and
barricades.
"Those weren't just some tree-huggers against Rijkswaterstaat in a
legal action. In September '82, it looked like war." He talks about it like
a veteran about the resistance. "Thursday afternoon we got a signal from the
cook at the Kromhout Barracks. He had been ordered to cook that evening for
thousand men that night. That's when we knew what time it was." The evacuation went
The eviction was heavy-handed. A preliminary injunction filed was not even waited.
"With three bulldozers, they knocked everything down," he says. The last tree had just been
cut down when the judge ruled: they had to stay.
Now, thirty-seven years later, Kloppenborg has better luck. Thanks to the Council
of State and the European Court, which put a line through the Program Approach
Nitrogen (PAS). That was such a truly Dutch invention: polluting industry and
 agriculture could bypass the rules as long as they promised to compensate the
nature damage later.
For years people built and farmed on the ecological pittance. Now the
highest judges are puncturing that nitrogen bubble. The reflexes are also truly Dutch.
Bouwend Nederland is begging for an "emergency law. And there will, of course, be a
commission. Former minister Johan Remkes (VVD) is the scout for new
legal goat trails.
New exceptions! Otherwise "our country is locked," as ministers, Cora van
Nieuwenhuizen (VVD) in the lead, like to call it. "On the contrary, it is an opening," argues
Kloppenborg. "You can come up with new solutions for mobility and transport
that take into account the entire ecosystem of the region."
The action group "Amelisweerd not asphalted" recently held a
tree-climbing workshop for potential new occupiers. Perhaps that will come in
a few years will come in handy again. Although the nitrogen verdict now really forces the government to
cleaner building and less growth. "If the minister is wise, she is already starting
on a tactical retreat."
Christiaan Weijts writes a column at this site every Friday.
A version of this article also appeared in NRC Handelsblad of July 19, 2019.
Share Mail the editors
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About NRC
Working At
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

