12/5/22, 12:40 PM Column | The design of our country has been left to fate and the market for too long - NRC
Opinion
Note: Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
03:17
The design of our country has been left too long
left to fate and the market
Ö Christiaan Weijts © 4november2022 Ô Reading time 1 minute
ok I love nature, but I would
not like to sacrifice the climate to it.
Porthos, a major carbon storage project,
is now threatened with collapse by the latest
plot twist in the nitrogen tragedy. Many other
sustainability projects as well.
Windmills, solar farms: without
gasoline engines you don't build them.
In fact, the State Council is now ordering omelets
without breaking a single egg.
Insufferable. Especially if you take Remkes' Not Everything
Can (2019) leafs through again, and reads in a
pie chart that the entire construction sector constitutes only 0.6 percent of the problem.
Don't get me wrong. I too love Lady Justice's blindfold - all polluters are
equal - but I would be reluctant to sacrifice common sense to it. And who is forcing
our ministers to walk around with that same blindfold too? Some eyesight
is quite welcome when setting up a country.
In itself, the exemptions for housing and sustainability were therefore not so crazy.
not so crazy after all. Better starter homes than mega-stables. Better clean energy than
chicken shed. That was the underlying political vision.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/04/eieren-breken-a4147255?t=1670240046 1/2
 12/5/22, 12:40 PM Column | The design of our country has been left to fate and market for too long - NRC
Only: they were uncashed checks. The downside of nitrogen space is that you can't
carelessly reprint it. Politicians did not dare to choose who should sacrifice space
sacrifice, which eggs had to die for all those ambitious bouncers. But
only toddlers can hide by closing their eyes.
For too long the design of our country has been left to 1) the market and 2) the myriad forces
that beset us time and again (natural damage, asylum influx, geopolitical stomping grounds,
global warming, the arrival of the wolf).
Fate and market. Above our heads, above our broad rivers, these are slowly acting on
each other. They wage their battle in our landscape, and the resultant of those forces is the
living environment with which we residents must make do.
Amazing, for a democracy, how little influence we seem to have on this. What
do we want? Buy up farms for wider highways? How much nature? How many
inhabitants? Between the market and fate, citizens and elected representatives must be able to provide a
buffer against arbitrariness.
How many pastures? How many mega-stables? What keeps us from making a realistic
future plan for immigration, before the great climactic migrations of the people come to us
come crashing down on us?
All polluters are equal, but some are just slightly more equal than
others. If you put that 0.6 percent next to the nitrogen giants - agriculture (46 percent) and
abroad (32 percent) - then it's clear where we need to get space from.
Right. Invade Germany, flatten the Ruhr area and redevelop it into
a second Veluwe. If that proves an impregnable egg shell, we can at least
start with the bird flu valley of Gelderland.
Christiaan Weijts writes a column at this site every Friday.
A version of this article also appeared in the November 4, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/04/eieren-breken-a4147255?t=1670240046 2/2

