12/5/22, 12:40 PM Column | CO2 storage slows energy transition - NRC
Opinion
Note: Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
05:44
CO2 storage slows down the
energy transition
Column The storage of CO3 underground is a stopgap measure, thinks
Martijn Katan.
© November 24, 2022 ÒReading time 3 minutes
he Rotterdam industry wants to store
CO" underground. This
releases a little bit of nitrogen; therefore
the Council of State is blocking this plan. Will the
climate a victim of the nitrogen rules here?
CO emissions lead to global warming.
The Port of Rotterdam Authority therefore wants to capture part
of the CO released from refineries and
factories and store it underground; then
those factories would no longer
caused. A recent ruling by the Council
of State makes the construction of the necessary
plants, however, is impossible. That ruling was provoked by environmentalists. Why
would environmentalists want to block the reduction of CO} emissions?
The CO} would be supplied by four Rotterdam companies, including Shell and
Exxon. The Rotterdam Port Authority wants to transport that CO" through a pipeline to
a drilling rig in the North Sea and pump it into empty gas fields under the seabed. At the
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/24/co2-opslag-vertraagt-de-energietransitie-2-a4149159
1/3
 12/5/22, 12:40 PM Column | CO2 storage slows energy transition - NRC
construction of that pipeline and associated facilities, however, nitrogen is emitted.
Thus, the benefit of less CO is offset by the disadvantage of temporarily more
nitrogen emissions. Johan Vollenbroek and his action group Mobilisation for the Environment
filed a complaint about this, which was granted by the Council of State.
As a result, construction of the pipeline is at a standstill. How bad is that?
More difficult than expected
There have been a number of attempts worldwide to isolate and store the CO that comes out of factory chimneys.
coming out of factory chimneys has been isolated and stored. Mostly, they failed. Technically it turned out to be much more difficult
than expected and the costs were prohibitive. Even if the Rotterdammers succeed
where so many others failed, the problem remains that proponents of CO
look at what CO" is released in the plant itself and ignore the stages preceding it.
ignore. Take a power plant, for example. Before the coal or gas that
goes into the combustion boilers, a lot of greenhouse gas has already been released.
True, most of the CO" released in the power plant itself can be captured.
Not completely, 10 to 15 percent still escapes from the chimney, and the plants
that capture the CO" consume fuel themselves and therefore emit additional CO".
But all in all, capture and storage seems to give a nice reduction in
greenhouse gas production at the plant. The story becomes different, however, if we include the
preceding steps.
For natural gas must first be pumped and transported. In the process
greenhouse gas is released, in part by leaking natural gas, which is an eighty times stronger
greenhouse gas as CO. Capturing and storing the CO, in the power plant therefore reduces
therefore only marginally reduces total greenhouse gas emissions, counting from the
pumping natural gas from the ground to burning it for
power generation.
Significant emissions
This regarding Shell and Exxon; I have assumed that their CO, comes from plants that are
are similar to power plants. At those kinds of plants, CO storage does
little benefit. The two other participating industries, Air Liquide and Air Products,
manufacture hydrogen from natural gas. This releases a relatively large amount of CO. Most of it
can be captured and put underground, but the rest goes into the air. Natural gas
itself is a much more potent greenhouse gas than CO" and in pumping and transporting it
leaks a few percent into the air. If you take the whole route from gas field to
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/24/co2-opslag-vertraagt-de-energietransitie-2-a4.149159 2/3
 12/5/22, 12:40 PM Column | CO2 storage slows energy transition - NRC
hydrogen plant therefore, despite the
CO' storage still leads to significant greenhouse gas emissions.
United Nations climate experts
consider underground CO'-storage indispensable to
limit global warming. That seems | Jl
me, however, more motivated by despair over the
unwillingness of rulers and voters to really L-"
do something about the climate, than by a realistic
assessment of what this CO'-storage can do. TALKING TO NRC
is an unproven, expensive technique and a Bottom of this article can be
stopgap measure that delivers too little. The grant responding subscribers. Read here
spent on it could be better used for something else more about responding to NRC.nl.
be used for something else. The only thing that really works is to
leave coal, oil and gas in the ground and get our
energy from CO'-free sources: nuclear power plants, wind and solar.
I don't think the current Rotterdam industry is going to do that. Would fifty years from now
'Shell' and 'Exxon' be names from the past, of companies that could not
make the turn toward a fossil-free world? Like producers of rolls of film such as Kodak and
Agfa, who were made obsolete by the smartphone? Internal emails from Shell and
BP, at any rate, show that they see CO' storage primarily as a way to keep running
on oil and gas, rather than making a difficult and expensive transition to CO'-free
energy sources.
CO'-storage slows the transition to CO'-free energy. Environmentalists
like Vollenbroek realize this well. The ruling they elicited from the Council of State reduces
nitrogen emissions but is also better for the climate in the long run.
Martijn Katan is a biochemist and Emeritus Professor of Nutritional Sciences at the Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam. For figures, sources and interests see mkatan.nl.
A version of this article also appeared in the November 26, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/24/co2-opslag-vertraagt-de-energietransitie-2-a4.149159 3/3

