12/5/22, 12:44 PM Brewery keeps fields wet with its wastewater - NRC
Note: Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
07:34
Reportage
The brewery keeps
the fields with its wastewater
fields
Now that it has barely
rain, farmland and natural land are drying out fast. But there are
many ways to combat the drought.
Ö ArjenSchreuder © May152022 ÒReading Time
 
5 minutes
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/05/15/de-bierbrouwerij-houdt-met-zijn-afvalwater-de-akkers-nat-a4124451 1/6
 12/5/22, 12:44 PM Brewery keeps fields wet with its wastewater - NRC
The first leaves of chicory are barely visible to the naked eye, so much
trouble the little plant is having growing in the fields of De
Krakenburg in Olen, a hamlet northeast of Eindhoven. "We are
thinking about whether we should irrigate," says farmer Kees Huijbers. That costs a lot of money. His
father Lex: "One shower would be enough?"
It hasn't rained for a long time on the high sandy soils in eastern Brabant - just
as in the rest of the country. There is no panic yet, but Dutch water managers are
slowly becoming quite concerned about the drought, which has been going on for about two months now.
persists. The so-called precipitation deficit, the difference between evaporation and precipitation,
is increasing sharply and amounts to about one hundred millimeters. This is a level that occurs once in
every twenty years.
Also read:
Again it's too dry. What are we going to do about it?
Farmland and natural land are rapidly drying out, especially in the higher parts of the southern and eastern Netherlands.
southern and eastern Netherlands. And it seemed to be going so well. After three dry summers
the groundwater level in just about all of the Netherlands had sunk far, until, fortunately, last year it
it rained heavily again last year and the level was back to normal by the end of the winter. Until March
March the drought set in again.
Hundreds of ways
There are hundreds of ways to combat drought and its effects. One of them is
what father and son Huijbers from Olen have been doing for a few years: they irrigate the crops on
their fields with water from the surrounding area. In their case, this is treated wastewater from
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/05/15/de-bierbrouwerij-houdt-met-zijn-afvalwater-de-akkers-nat-a4124451 2/6
 12/5/22, 12:44 PM Brewery keeps fields wet with its wastewater - NRC
beer brewer Bavaria. Which normally discharged it several kilometers away into a stream,
but now in an underground pipe, which then flows to ninety centimeters deep
pipes in the fields to keep the soil wet. Lex Huijbers: "There were once a
a few people from the brewery and the farmers were having a beer and they concluded that
together that it was actually very strange that all that water was brought to the sea so quickly.
to the sea. So the idea of using that water for agriculture was born."
The entrepreneurs, who in addition to growing crops also run a nursery, a
care farm and a hostel, will receive European funding, according to a rough
estimate about five hundred cubic meters of water per day, and that provides a
higher and thus stable groundwater levels. Elsewhere on their land, the groundwater even rises
occasionally rises so much that it causes a nuisance. "I once planted trees in the playground of
the nursery, and those trees just floated away," says Kees Huijbers.
Read also:
The growing season is still young, but where is the rain?
He has been able to control the water level via an app on his phone for several weeks now. That the
That the chicory is still so thin at the moment is because the carrots have barely touched the abundant water,
high in the soil. It is almost inevitable that
soon the plants will benefit from what water managers call "level-controlled drainage".
"level-controlled drainage."
During previous dry summers, they grew on their ten acres of land
successively sugar beets, barley and corn, and they did well. They got nineteen tons
dry matter per hectare from the land. Lex Huijbers: "A third more silage corn than
normal. We had never performed that before. While the costs are the same. It is
It is not for nothing that we are so enthusiastic about this" And it is therefore logical that more and more
farmers are interested in the brewer's former process water.
Achterhoek and Twente
During the three dry summers of 2018, 2019 and 2020, the Achterhoek and Twente were
were hit the hardest. Nowhere was it drier than there. Water managers from the eastern
the country have not been idle in recent years to prevent the effects of drought in the
future. It also now doesn't take much effort for farmers to
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/05/15/de-bierbrouwerij-houdt-met-zijn-afvalwater-de-akkers-nat-a4124451 3/6
 12/5/22, 12:44 PM Brewery keeps fields wet with its wastewater - NRC
convince them to cooperate, says Wim Wassink, because the damage caused by drought is
many times greater for agriculture than the damage from flooding. "In the past
farmers reasoned that in wet weather they could throw away their crops and in
dry time they could irrigate. But nowadays you often can't
sprinkle"
Photo Walter Autumn
Wassink coordinates freshwater supplies in the eastern Netherlands and walks in the
Overijssel village of Enter, in western Twente, to the banks of the Regge River. The river
flowed straight through the landscape here just a few years ago, but now meanders there
idyllically through it, narrower, and with many shallow bends. As a result, the
river water flows less quickly toward the Vecht and from there to the IJsselmeer, and stays
longer in the area - thereby raising the groundwater level up to several kilometers on
both sides of the banks.
The "deepening and re-mandering" of the Regge, to once again dip into the water jargon
dive, is one of a hundred and fifty projects carried out over the past six years
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/05/15/de-bierbrouwerij-houdt-met-zijn-afvalwater-de-akkers-nat-a4124451 4/6
 12/5/22, 12:44 PM Brewery keeps fields wet with its wastewater - NRC
to deal with drought in the area. These are sometimes complicated and costly
interventions, as with the Regge River. What has also happened: in more places, water from larger
waters, such as the Twente Canal, in more places. Furthermore, on farmland and in the
nature, many ditches have been closed, so that the fallen rainwater does not immediately
run off. Also, in many cities rainwater no longer disappears into the sewers, but is
it is infiltrated into the soil.
And what has also helped in the current drought
is that many water authorities have set the levels in the
waters much higher than the Netherlands is
used to. Rivers, canals and waterways are
quite full, and those who do not know better would
think that the drought is not so bad. In
reality, the waters are temporarily full in
an attempt to hold the water as long as possible.
as long as possible. Wassink: "Ten years ago the mindset was
mindset was: oy, we have a lot of water, let's
get rid of it".
Flexible water level management, it's called. And for the time being
And for the time being, because this spring
This spring there will still be plenty of water
from abroad into the Netherlands this spring.
Of course, there is a limit to fighting
Father L h Kees Hui
of drought, because if you're not careful, you'll keep ader Lex (right) and son Kees Huijbers
. at their watering system that retains their
hold a lot of water that if the rain suddenly comes with
. . irrigates the fields with treated wastewater, flooding occurs.
falls from the sky, floods
from beer brewer Bavaria.
threaten. Wassink: "If you close all the watercourses Photo Walter Herfst ta
close them, you have solved the drought. But then
this area has become one big swamp. That
is not what you want.
And another thing: you can't combat drought in a short time, as you can with flooding
by building a dike or a dam, for example. Tackling
drought takes decades, during which different
measures must be taken.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/05/15/de-bierbrouwerij-houdt-met-zijn-afvalwater-de-akkers-nat-a4124451 5/6
 12/5/22, 12:44 PM Brewery keeps fields wet with its wastewater - NRC
Wassink: "I think we are at about 10
percent of the total." Not until 2050 do the water managers expect to be more or less
ready. But even then, no matter how much you can mitigate the effects of drought ,
you can't prevent it from not raining. So if no more drops fall, as a
water manager powerless. Wassink looks around at the banks of the Regge and
says, "Now if it doesn't rain for a month or more, this place will be brown."
DRY LAND
In this series, NRC pays attention to ways of dealing with a
changing climate.
1. How do you make sure your garden can handle both heavy rain and drought?
2. Farmers and water boards arm themselves against drought
3. Can corn be grown to withstand drought?
4. In Andalusia, much of the fruit crop is at risk of failure due to extreme drought
B, This dry spring parallels record year 1976: what are the consequences?
A version of this article also appeared in the May 16, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/05/15/de-bierbrouwerij-houdt-met-zijn-afvalwater-de-akkers-nat-a4124451 6/6

