= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
BACKGROUND
Nature is Óóof the saddle locust -
so man should just stay home more often
Too busy Nature is suffering far too much from people, says Natuurmonumenten.
Professional photo shoot, boot camp? Apply six weeks in advance, and pay
50 euros.
Ingmar Vriesema Ofebruary2024 Reading time
3 minutes
 
Listening Reading List A
 /
vs
 
A
Á
 
Dn
 
ro
The
 
ears
 
1
 
rt
MeT
"
PPT
 
is
 
 
PI
sea
 
 
ZA
jeg
 
 
and
Dn
 
er
 
_
 
And
 
48,1AAEZE
len
 
7OU BEE ZEE
 
7
ANAD AE,
wt
 
 
NN
 
ON
EP
va
 
s
 
ef
 
p
 
Tb
(ON K Zip
and er PN
d
" oves
" hs
itn iva
k (alauda arvensis) must be
ri
veldleeuwe
AIURICi national park Veluwezoom.
ek. The saddleback grasshopper
Photo Dieuwertje Bravenboer
 ephippiger) has all but disappeared at the heather edge. The yellowhammer (emberiza
citrinella) loves that grasshopper and finds the dog in the pot.
But, it must be said: one population is thriving exceptionally well in Veluwezoom.
Man (homo sapiens) enters the forbidden
resting areas, wildlife cameras equipped with infrared record. They walk or
bike around there with stray glances. Or they look alert out of their eyes and wear a
camouflage suit and a camera with a telephoto lens around their necks. Sportier specimens
leave behind so many wrappers from power bars that the forester's coat pocket at
bulges at the end of his week. They sweat on gravel bikes, meditate in groups,
trying to spot game before the sun rises. Soramigen do their business, knows
the forester. It takes little effort on his part, tracking down a great
human message.
A maximum of three dogs
Enough is enough, rep association Natuurmonumenten recently explained: we tighten
the rules for recreation and commerce! Not only in Veluwezoom, but in all
our 10 thousand acres of nature. The Wormer and Jisperveld, the Lower
Dinkel Valley, the National Park Schiermonnikoog, the Schinveldse Bossen: everywhere
nature is under pressure. Professional photo shoot of a wedding couple? Request it
six weeks in advance, Cost: 50 euros, and the forester decides if it is allowed.
Âs scattering? Unfortunately, not allowed anywhere anymore, You give boot camp, shinrin-yoku or
 other paid recreation? Not without permission. Application fee: 50 euros.
Walking dogs? Maximum three dogs per handler.
Sorry, this really has to be done, says Natuurmonumenten. All those dogs chase the pigs,
badgers, breeding birds and people. The ashes of your loved one are
bad for the most vulnerable nature. And professional photographers? We just want to
just discourage anything that happens in nature.
Enforcement will be an ordeal though, with one boa per 17
square kilometer
The question is how hot the soup will be eaten. For the dog walking services, who
seeing their business model collapse, there is a "transition period" in places until
2025. Moreover, enforcement of the new rules is a test: the
association employs 65 foresters with boa powers. That amounts
to one boa for every 17 square kilometers. "Playing politics is not our goal either," says
spokesperson Naomi Persoon. Nevertheless: fines are certainly not out of the question.
Sports clubs, professional photographers and other visitors who mistakenly do not
ask permission, risk a fine of at least 110 euros.
And yes, says Natuurmonumenten, the rules are strict, but don't forget: there have
always been conditions for visiting our nature. You were never allowed
 you were not allowed to leave the paths, scattering ashes and walking dogs were already subject to strict rules.
already subject to strict rules. Even an organization like the Forestry Commission has
of rules,
And yet. Natuurmonumenten is such a big boy and the regulations are so
tightened up, that landscape and wedding photographer Nando Harmsen from Helmond
went to find out for the first time "which nature actually belonged to whom." Areas of
Natuurmonumenten he will "very definitely" avoid, he says. Giving six weeks' notice to
submit an application: not seen him. Joh, he has always followed the rules
complied. Never deviates from the trails, respects nature. "There are always rotten
apples. A few individuals who ruin nature. But Natuurmonumenten
is now punishing everyone."
Turning a blind eye
Marit Hendriksen of the Haarlem dog walking service Dog Doc fears for
the survival of her profession. She runs with six dogs, fellow
services sometimes with fifteen. A maximum of three is hardly profitable, she says,
unless you raise the price enormously. By no means everyone can afford it.
What about the elderly with little money who have a dog for company
but can no longer go for long walks?
No misunderstanding: Marit Hendriksen has sympathy for Natuurmonumenten. The
pressure on nature is too high. But where should we go? Hendriksen knocked on the door of her
her municipality back in 2016, hoping for an alternative site. In vain,
 she says, While: the Haarlem scouting associations, isn't there an opportunity there? "Those
have large grounds and I think only use them on Saturdays."
Photo Dieuwertje Bravenboer
Owner Beitske Bouwman of the Anaya Academy lets people through shinrin-yoku
experience that they are part of nature, This is how she lets them close their eyes,
slowly, after which they discover the consciousness in their body and learn
to feel that the tree nearby has just as much substantial matter. We are
nature, Bouwman teaches. And then it doesn't help that this wholesome, holistic
nature suddenly turns out to be the domain of an association with house rules. Strict
house rules.
Really, she understands that Natuurmonumenten has to do fêts, it's annoying afs
people flout the rules. But is paying 50 euros
application fee the solution? How moot would it be if Natuurmonumenten invested those
euros were invested in education? That people start to realize that they coincide
with nature? "Because that realization," she says, "is something we af society have lost."
 Forester in Veluwezoom Ruben Vermeer can follow that reasoning: yes, we are
nature. Or, as he often hears people say, "nature belongs to everyone.
Absolutely. But doesn't that just mean, he says, that nature also belongs to the
yellowhammer, of the great thrush and of the oh so beautifully singing woodlark?
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 10, 2024 newspaper.
Share <6 Mail the editors
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture no weakening
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest
milk
21 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About us
Working at
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

