= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
NEWS
Nitrogen emissions must be even further
down than thought, say Wageningen
researchers
Nature Current nitrogen standards are based on 2011 research and are
out of date, according to new research by Wageningen University. Some
natural areas can withstand nitrogen worse than thought.
Flóri Hofman 31augustus2023 Reading Time 2 minutes
Listening (d) Reading List A
 Wageningen University researchers conclude SREGEST |
 
À
Photo Eric Brinkhorst
 Thursday. The study was commissioned by the (now outgoing)
Minister for Nature and Nitrogen Christianne van der Wal (VVD).
The current nitrogen standards are based on research from 2011 and, according to
the researchers outdated. "Deposition must be reduced further than previously
was assumed to meet the targets," says the researcher involved in the study
ecologist Wieger Wamelink in a statement. "But for now, the current
exceedance in many places is still so high that we first need to see if we can
current deposition by half. That is already quite a task,
but if that succeeds, it will already lead to quite an improvement for nature."
Outgoing minister Van der Wal writes in a press release that she considers the study
"worrying news for nature". "The need to reduce nitrogen
reduction was already high, due to the new scientific insights our
task has unfortunately become greater." She plans to have RIVM in the near future to
investigate what effect the "current commitment" is having and what more is needed to
protect nature. That study will be completed in October, Van der
Waltz's ministry through a spokesperson.
Read also
In addition to the 2,500 already known farmers are bumping
possibly thousands of other agricultural companies
also illegally emit nitrogen
United Nations
 The researchers from the WUR translated a report published last year about
vulnerable nature throughout Europe to the specific Dutch situation. A
research group led by the United Nations concluded that
some nature types are more vulnerable to nitrogen emissions than during the
previous European nature study conducted in 2011. In order to adequately protect these
vulnerable nature to be adequately protected, the standards therefore had to be stricter,
researchers concluded.
What that would mean for Dutch standards was not exactly clear.
The WUR study now shows that some Dutch nature also
can withstand nitrogen worse than thought, and thus that nitrogen standards should be lowered.
must be lowered. On average, emissions must be reduced by 1.3 kilograms per hectare per year, to a total of
down, to a total emission of 17.7 kilograms. This is an
average for the whole of the Netherlands: in vulnerable nature areas the standard will have to be even
more stringent, while the standard for other regions may remain unchanged.
remain unchanged.
Critical deposition value
The researchers distinguish 84 types of nature in the Netherlands, 67 of which are
sensitive to nitrogen. To measure how much nitrogen may be deposited on a
nature area, politicians and scientists use the so-called critical deposit
deposition value (KDW). Each type of nature has its own KDW. This is based on
of tests in the field, in the lab and with models, and determines
 how much nitrogen is allowed to settle before permanent damage occurs. If
too much nitrogen is deposited, plant species that are characteristic of an area can disappear.
characteristic of an area.
In addition to the 84 Dutch nature types that have a KDW, there are another 14
habitats of plant species in Europe with such a nitrogen standard. For 64 of the
98 nature types the KDW remains the same, for 32 the standard becomes stricter and for 2
actually more relaxed. "Nitrogen that is deposited in a nature area remains for years in the
soil and in plants for years and builds up here. At the same time, the
soil increasingly," says ecologist Wamelink. "The longer the
[research] measurements run, the clearer it becomes what the negative consequences
are of too much nitrogen on nature. As a result, the KDW is also becoming more
more accurate and usually lower."
Read also
Not every farmer expected to make his own calculation
to know if they are peak polluters
A version of this article also appeared in the September 1, 2023 newspaper.
Share <6 Mail the editors
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About us
Working at
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

