mm This is an article from the NRC archive ®
Note: Elements may be missing from this print version.
Ecological farming in exchange for
land
Nature management Staatsbosbeheer makes agreements with farmers: whoever practices
nature-friendly farming, may lease extra nature land.
Ö ArjenSchreuder © 6juni2018 Ô Reading time
2 minutes
 
 By leasing natural land from Staatsbosbeheer, such as at the Reeuwijkse Plassen, the farmer is obliged to meet certain
nature goals.
 Photo Rien Zilvold ta
All the cows have names. Ardy de Goeij stands next to a newborn calf in the barn and
consults his phone. "This is Nellie 158" The organic dairy farmer is one of the
forty farmers with whom Staatsbosbeheer will sign contracts starting Thursday: whoever promises to work in a
their entire farm to work in a nature-friendly way, may lease additional natural land from
Staatsbosbeheer. "So that nature in the whole area will benefit," says forester
Luuk Oevermans.
We are in Oukoop, a spot near the Reeuwijkse Plassen in South Holland. From this
cattle pasture area after a land consolidation fifteen years ago, most of the farmers
left. Since then, the Forestry Commission has managed a lot of nature there. You can take beautiful walks there,
sung to by meadow birds like black-tailed godwit, redshank and lapwing. During the
land consolidation not to leave. "I was too attached to this beautiful area, and my
friends and family," he says.
The more land, the more nature-friendly you can farm. De Goeij, married with two
children, has 148 dairy cows plus young stock. They graze on his own 106 acres of land and
recently he leased another 80 acres from the Forestry Commission.
As a result, the number of cows is relatively low; the so-called grazing pressure at De
Goeij averages less than one cow per hectare. He also uses very little manure. All manure
comes from his own potting shed. The manure consists of reeds, straw and excrement and is good for the
biodiversity on the land. "There are a lot of worms in it, and insects," says De Goeij. For the
ideal mixture in his potting shed, de Goeij now buys reeds from France, but soon he will use the
reeds from the Reeuwijkse Plassen. "What could be nicer than to use this reed for that?
" says forester Oevermans.
 Staatsbosbeheer leases about 50,000 hectares of natural land to farmers. A maximum of 4,000
hectare may be eligible for leasing to "motivated" nature farmers who undertake to
commit themselves to working ecologically on the rest of their farms as well.
Staatsbosbeheer wants the forty experiments to contribute to the "transition"
to a more "nature-infused agriculture," Officially: "Making a contribution to
conservation and development of biodiversity in the Netherlands through more extensive farms
also on the farmer's own farmland adjacent to the nature reserve"
Like Ardy de Goeij. He uses neither artificial fertilizer nor pesticides. He tackles weeds
mechanically; a machine cuts away the heads of the weeds so that no seeds are spread.
spread. The cows are fed herb-rich grass instead of the usual
ryegrass. They also get organic concentrate, potatoes for example. Daily
his cows produce 22 liters per day. "That is relatively little. But because of that they are also very
healthy. They are almost never sick"
By leasing natural land, the farmer is obliged to meet certain nature goals:
'moist meadow bird landscape' for example, and in another part of De Goeijs leased
land applies the botanical regime for herb- and fauna-rich grassland'. That means:
No manure at all.
We walk across the land and see cows trudging in the distance, in the direction of the
Reeuwijkse Plassen. The cows usually walk outside, covering three to four
De Goeij: "We have chosen a vital breed, a cross between three breeds with
with strong leg muscles, cows that can walk well?" The cows walk unaccompanied.
"We drive them up a little bit, and then they know how to find their way on their own. "It's not that hard
isn't. "If you walk into a pub, you know where the bar is, don't you?"

