= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
NEWS
A third of subsidy schemes for
agriculture may harm biodiversity
Agricultural subsidies Of 34 agricultural subsidy schemes, one
12 harm nature, an analysis commissioned by the
Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality (LNV). Among other things, they serve
economies of scale and production growth.
Martin Kuiper, Milo van Bokkum 5september2023 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening (d) Reading List A
 Twelve subsidy schemes for Dutch
agriculture have potentially harmful effects on biodiversity. This appears
commissioned by the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Ygedselkwaliteit SN Van ditch in the Hoeksche Waard.
Photo Jeffrey Groeneweg / ANP
 The RVO looked at 34 agricultural schemes - from income support to farmers
to subsidies for innovative barn techniques and grassland preservation. Of each
assessed the impact on nature and biodiversity, the variety of plants
animals and fungi. The service, an agency of LNV and Economische Zaken,
uses four categories: potentially positive, protective, neutral and
potentially harmful. Twelve subsidy schemes, together good for over a billion
on an annual basis, fall into the latter category.
With these subsidies, the government is in fact working against itself. The Rutte IV
has allocated 24.3 billion euros until 2035 for the 'nitrogen fund', which is intended to make
to make agriculture more sustainable and promote biodiversity.
Read also
Sustainable cultivation earns farmers less money
Economies of scale
Most regulations that could be harmful encourage intensification of
agriculture. They encourage economies of scale in farming. This is
bad for biodiversity, because the number of animals kept and production
then often increase. Thus, a lot of income support still goes to farmers - this year
more than 400 million euros - which drives up land prices and rental payments. This
leads to economies of scale, according to the researchers.
 Also financial support for technical innovation in stables and greenhouses causes
intensification and thus has a negative impact on nature. Farmers who receive this
subsidy must co-invest. Because it not seldom involves
tens of thousands of euros that they have to earn back, this drives up production
and intensification, according to the researchers.
A total of 34 agricultural schemes were examined, from
income support to farmers to subsidies for innovative
barn techniques and grassland preservation.
They also comment on a scheme that seeks to prevent grassland
being used for maize cultivation. Large tracts of maize land are not good for
biodiversity, they say, but the scheme complicates conversion
from grass to a more diverse crop.
Focused on food security
The researchers note that some schemes, such as those for
income support, date back to the time when Europe was concerned about
food security. In the decades after World War II, the focus was on
modernizing agriculture and high food production to prevent hunger
prevention. Less attention was paid to environmental and biodiversity impacts.
 Meanwhile, the researchers write, there are other priorities: climate
nature and water quality.
Read also
In addition to the 2,500 already known farmers, there are
possibly thousands of other agricultural companies
Also illegally emitting nitrogen
The fact that the Ministry of Agriculture has only now had its subsidies extensively
is striking. The Netherlands has been in a
nitrogen crisis, after the Council of State ruled that governments were too
generously allowed nitrogen emissions. The agricultural sector is responsible for
a large part of those emissions. Moreover, as early as 2011, the Netherlands signed a
UN biodiversity treaty as early as 2011. One goal is to stop subsidies that are
harmful to biodiversity or to green them.
Outgoing minister Van der Wal (Nature and Nitrogen, VVD) has sent the Second
House of Representatives the RVO study, calling the conclusions a "serious
outcome." In her letter she writes that the 34 schemes will be investigated more thoroughly
will be examined.
At the same time, she points out that the research also shows that the negative impact of
a number of schemes has already been reduced in recent years, for example by
cutting benefits if additional animals are kept because of them. Subsidies that are
 harmful to nature and biodiversity should be adjusted or
stopped, Van der Wal said.
A version of this article also appeared in the Sept. 6, 2023, newspaper.
Share Mail the editors
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Take an Editorial Mediahuis NRC
Working at subscription Editorial staff NRC Careers
Copyright Login The Ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create an account Colophon NRC Readers' Fund
Delivery terms Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My Reading List Customer Service
Our app My subscriptions Family reports
Archive Service & Delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) E

