12/10/22, 10:08 AM It will take 30 years, cost billions and start after summer: the redesign of the Netherlands - NRC
Note: Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
06:57
It takes 30 years, costs
billions and starts after the
summer: the redesign
of the Netherlands
Future From greening the cities to reforming the
agriculture, over the next 30 years the Netherlands is going to be transformed. "Not
everything can and not everything can go everywhere.
L, ES nm Ee ' we
A han A | je ed
zi on
tn dn a ij zz ee 8 pa
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/07/25/in-de-grote-verbouwing-wordt-heel-nederland-binnenstebuiten-gekeerd-a4137371 1/5
 12/10/22, 10:08 AM It will take 30 years, cost billions and start after the summer: the redesign of the Netherlands - NRC
ONE DUCK
The "great remodeling of the Netherlands," Minister Hugo de Jonge (Housing
and Spatial Planning, CDA) calls it. The sweeping redevelopment of city and countryside
which begins after the summer and will cost many billions. Until 2050 and beyond, a
"spatial puzzle" that will have to address various social
issues will be addressed. Think: housing shortage and asylum reception,
climate change and energy transition, agriculture and nitrogen, environment and nature, traffic
and transportation and the economic development of the Netherlands.
Also read:
How the government lost control over the design of the Netherlands
let go
Twelve years ago, the Rutte I government let go of national direction in urbanization and
landscape policy, transferring it to the provinces and municipalities. Now the
Cabinet-Rutte IV is directing again precisely because the problems are acute. The major rebuilding
will be a battle for space, because the Netherlands is too small for all the wishes, plans and
ambitions. "Not everything is possible and not everything can go everywhere," says De Jonge.
What will the Netherlands look like after 2050 - if the plans succeed? In October, the
twelve provinces start making plans for both national and regional goals. A
year later, the national and provincial governments will make new agreements on area development. In
2024, the sharpened National Environmental Vision (NOVI), the long-term vision of
the national government's long-term vision for spatial planning. should come into force.
The contours of the major renovation are already taking shape. Well known is the ambition of
the cabinet to build 900,000 homes by 2030, two-thirds of which must be affordable
rent or buy must be. Many homes are planned in the west, such as in the region of
Amsterdam (175,000 to 220,000 homes) and the southern Randstad (170,000). But
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/07/25/in-de-grote-verbouwing-wordt-heel-nederland-binnenstebuiten-gekeerd-a4137371 2/5
 12/10/22, 10:08 AM It will take 30 years, cost billions and start after the summer: the redesign of the Netherlands - NRC
more housing is also needed in, for example, the Arnhem-Nijmegen region
(70,000), urban Brabant (94,000), the Zwolle region (40,000) and the Groningen-
Assen (21,000 housing units). The Lelylijn, an intended train connection between Lelystad and
Groningen, should make the north more accessible.
Local flooding
"We can't all continue to live on a clump in the Randstad," says
Minister De Jonge. "Because it's too expensive and too crowded, and we would then have too much space there
up for nature, agriculture and the economy, for example."
Climate change is another reason to build more outside the low-lying west.
"It may be wise" to "increase development in southern, eastern and northern
parts of the Netherlands to increase (...) in areas less prone to
flooding," reads dryly in a May Chamber letter.
Provocative is also one sentence from the coalition agreement: "Water and soil become
guiding in spatial planning." What can be built where will depend on
for example, local flooding, subsidence, heat stress, pollution and
damage to nature.
"It's not just about housing construction, but also questions like: where do you build possible
new nuclear power plants?", says Meindert Smallenbroek, director of the Union of
Water Boards. "It's about choices for hundreds of years."
The Netherlands must continue to resist water and become "climate proof." Sea
and river dikes will be raised and reinforced where necessary. Risk areas
must be able to drain water in case of extreme rainfall or flooding, such as in
Limburg last year. Water buffers must also be established to replenish freshwater supplies.
supply; the high sandy soils are drying out, the coast and polders are salinizing.
Soil subsidence in peatland areas, once drained
for agriculture, leads to subsiding buildings and
infrastructure. Water boards have to pump
pumping and dried peat releases greenhouse gases.
are released. National and provincial governments must choose where agriculture and
living are still responsible, such as in Southwest Friesland.
Smallenbroek: "That will affect farmers, sectors and
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/07/25/in-de-grote-verbouwing-wordt-heel-nederland-binnenstebuiten-gekeerd-a4137371 3/5
 12/10/22, 10:08 AM It will take 30 years, cost billions and start after the summer: the redesign of the Netherlands - NRC
society around it, touch. These are almost cultural #40 Hague Affairs in the
summer: the big
interventions. I feel that that is sometimes underestimated Je
crisis episode
is underestimated."
The nitrogen approach will lead to shrinkage, sustainability and o
redistribution of agriculture, which now accounts for half of
nature and nitrogen according to the national government are most suitable
for agriculture are mainly Zeeland, northern North Holland, Friesland and
Groningen, Flevoland - and Gelderland and Brabant much less so.
Industrial clusters
At sea and on land further space is needed for the extraction, storage and transport of
sustainable energy, from wind turbines and solar panels. The cabinet is thinking of large
"industry clusters" at specific, safe locations, preferably near railroad lines
waterways, high-voltage cables or pipe networks.
Large economic, logistical hubs must become sustainable for a
climate-neutral Netherlands in 2050. Such as the ports of Rotterdam and the
Terneuzen-Vlissingen, as well as the North Sea Canal area in the Amsterdam metropolis.
Schiphol, too, must transform, while maintaining space in a densely populated
residential area.
Cities, for their part, must switch from natural gas to renewable energy as well as go green
to combat heat. It is becoming urgent in the underground to combine trees as well as cable
and heat networks. The centers of cities will become more car-free and
rapid electric (bicycle) traffic requires extra space on public roads.
Read also: Greening this Rotterdam neighborhood is
a fight for the underground
If as a country you want a high-quality knowledge economy, you must also choose a
high-quality living and working environment, says landscape architecture professor Adriaan
Geuze of TU Delft. "Quality and beautiful cultural landscape, a healthy environment and
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/07/25/in-de-grote-verbouwing-wordt-heel-nederland-binnenstebuiten-gekeerd-a4137371 4/5
 12/10/22, 10:08 AM It will take 30 years, cost billions and start after the summer: the redesign of the Netherlands - NRC
efficient mobility are the basis for attractive cities and innovative workplaces.
Look at Switzerland or Denmark"
Such a high-quality landscape also requires the kind of direction that the national government now says it is resuming,
according to Geuze. "It involves existential, integral choices, such as the reform of
agriculture, water management, a high-speed rail line or new data centers. You have to
secure democratically and that's what parliament is for?"
The big rebuild will therefore have to start with breaking the current
practice. According to Geuze, spatial planning has degenerated "into an unfathomable
lobby" of interest groups to the (local) government, as a result of which the public interest
has been squeezed. "The Netherlands has the best planning tradition in the world.
But right now we are at an utter impasse. It is going extra-parliamentary,
it's a democratic deficit"
A version of this article also appeared in the July 26, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/07/25/in-de-grote-verbouwing-wordt-heel-nederland-binnenstebuiten-gekeerd-a4137371 5/5

