= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
BACKGROUND
How feasible is a trading system for
nitrogen ?
Nitrogen Convert nitrogen emissions from (farms) into allowances that can be traded
can be traded, just as is happening now with CO, suggested top official Sandor Gaastra
recently suggested. But is that idea feasible? "It's too late for such a plan now.
Chris Hensen, Martin Kuiper 18January2024 Reading Time 3 minutes
Listening Reading List A
 b
 
ak
 
1
gr
 
b,
 
 
GA
Vld
'
VA
N
ús
 
Will
N
Ë.=
 
-
BANTMS
 
ke
 
":
 
 
à sk
 
_...
AFTER
 
AND
ut
|
Sar A
To
 
-
 
\
 
-#
 
x
oP
the Lab _ Kd ee U - th D Le Jehan "
ns TTE 8 e : Bg 5 . ce - id 8 kh
% " 4 m ' Jaa Ke < ge.
 
...
ef and he 6 had 3 u, EE will ir nn. N á - A LA PEEL
' . |
IL ULLILL year SCC Wes LO POE 5 ot A iaffdsti UIJ VUL IAIGIIG
. . , . . .... ... Photo Jeffrey Groenewe
power plant that fell under such a system. In six years, he sold , 9
only 52 euros worth of excess nitrogen rights because no one wanted to pay more
 pay. At the same time, he was spending 8,000 to 11,000 euros annually to measure
and recording the plant's emissions and the accountant who had to
had to check.
The system flopped. If the government wants a nitrogen trading systemn to succeed, says
Lomme, it must first make sure that the supply of
nitrogen rights is not too large.
On Thursday, the top boss of the Ministry of Economic Affairs and
Climate in economist magazine ESB for a similar nitrogen trading system. By
converting the nitrogen emissions of (farming) companies into rights that can be
traded, emissions can be reduced, according to
top official Sandor Gaastra. Just as is happening now with CO, too.
Gaastra's call runs counter to the government's policy that wants to curb the
trade in nitrogen rights wants to curb
In fact, this is a repetition of moves. The nitrogen system that Lomme was using
of, was pulled the plug in 2013 because it did not comply with the law
complied with according to a State Council ruling. Gaastra's proposal
has also been criticized: according to some experts, it is not feasible, or even works
counterproductive.
 Gaastra makes his appeal in a personal capacity, and this one is striking. It goes against
against the current cabinet policy that aims to curb the trade in nitrogen rights
on the contrary. There is now also at an "ad hoc" trade in those rights.
Companies can exchange their nitrogen precipitation rights among themselves.
But the government fears here a battle for nitrogen scarcity, in which the
most capital-rich companies draw the longest straw. In addition to farmers
Rijkswaterstaat, FrieslandCampina, the province of Brabant and Schiphol Airport entered the
nitrogen market - and some purchases were controversial.
"Too late
It is not entirely
clear, Nor whether his appeal is more widely supported within the ministry. His
proposal leans on a report that came out last summer, which also advocated
for regulated trade. That research went fairly unnoticed, says a
spokesman for the Ministry of Economic Affairs.
Gaastra may make a second attempt to stir up discussion on the subject.
Gaastra himself would not comment on his appeal. The Ministry of Economic
Affairs refers questions to the Ministry of Agriculture. That in turn
Economic Affairs.
 Read also
Replace nitrogen rights with nitrogen obligations
According to energy specialist Lomme, it is too late to introduce such a system. The
nitrogen problem is acute and an emissions trading system just needs a lot of time
needed. "It takes several years before you get the initial mistakes out," says Lomme,
"but the water is on our lips now." The Netherlands has been in a
nitrogen crisis: nature is suffering and emissions must be drastically reduced quickly.
reduced.
Professor Reyer Gerlagh of Tilburg University, who specializes in
economic issues of environment and climate, thinks it is a second-best
solution. It can be done much more simply, he says, by tackling the nitrogen problem at the
basis: taxing the supply of nitrogen, for example
cattle feed and fertilizer. Also, the government can impose that around sensitive
nature reserves that only organic and small-scale farming is allowed, according
him. But taxes are politically difficult. "It is politically easier to
emission rights that you give away for free; with that you give money to the
farmers."
Worth a lot of money
 Other experts fear that the possible arrival of a
nitrogen trading system will put a brake on addressing pollution. "It then becomes
financially attractive to maximize emissions first so that you as a farm can
maximum benefit at the time allowances are granted," says Raoul
Beunen, associate professor at the Open University and an expert on
nitrogen policy. "Such an approach is also at odds with the principle that the
polluter pays."
ee,
Such a system runs counter to the polluter pays principle
Raoul Beunen - nitrogen policy expert
Government policy is precisely aimed at persuading so many farmers to
to go organic, and this is only succeeding sparsely. Another
adverse effect is that mainly large farms will benefit from a
nitrogen trading system, says Beunen. Big companies will buy up the small ones, says
he. "This encourages economies of scale. That is at odds with the current nitrogen policy."
Assuming Gaastra's system comes to pass, consumers will also have to reckon
account for higher prices for agricultural products, Professor Gerlagh says.
"The costs for those rights will be passed on, we know from the experience
with CO. trade, even if farmers are now complaining that many consumers don't
want to pay."
 A version of this article also appeared in the Jan. 19, 2024 newspaper.
Share 96 Mail the editor Z
AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
The firm "Brothers C. and K. Kievit" is no more.
Oh well, what gives?
12 hours ago
Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture no weakening
16 hours ago
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Take an Editorial Media House NRC
Work at subscription Opinion editorial NRC Careers
Copyright Login The Ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create an account Colophon NRC Readers' Fund
 Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

