12/5/22, 12:45 PM The Netherlands' lowest polder shows why water levels can no longer be lowered - NRC
Note: Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
05:30
Reportage
In the lowest polder of
Netherlands can be seen
why the water level
can no longer be
lowered
Water level Although in several places in the Netherlands the
soil is sinking, the water level will not be lowered with it from now on.
lowered. "We are running up against the limits more and more," he said.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/in-de-laagste-polder-van-nederland-is-te-zien-waarom-het-waterpeil-niet-meer-kan-worden-verlaagd-a4150323 1/5
 12/5/22, 12:45 PM The Netherlands' lowest polder shows why the water level can no longer be lowered - NRC
The Schieland and Krimperwaard Water Board has decided to keep the water level in the
Zuidplaspolder to remain high to prevent subsidence.
Photos: Walter Herfst ta
More than six meters below sea level we stand, on the floor of a pumping station that keeps the deepest
polder in the Netherlands. This is the Zuidplaspolder. Over part of this area
water managers made a remarkable decision this week: although the
peat soil sinks every year, from now on the water level will no longer sink with this decrease.
drop. "We are, if we continue in the same way, at the end of the
makeability of the Netherlands," says Toon van der Klugt, as dike reeve the highest boss
of the Schieland and Krimpenerwaard Water Board.
The soil in part of the Zuidplaspolder has fallen so
so much that salty groundwater is bubbling up and
polluting the ditches, which consequently turn orange,
due to oxidizing iron. Cosy for soccer fans
these days, but undesirable in every way. Van der
Klugt: "In previous centuries we have always adjusted the
water level always adjusted to subsidence,
so that the same agriculture remained possible, but
That process is finite. We are now saying in time: we
can no longer lower the water level, keep
take that into account"
Government policy
The measure was passed unanimously this week, including with the
agreement of the representatives of the
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/in-de-laagste-polder-van-nederland-is-te-zien-waarom-het-waterpeil-niet-meer-kan-worden-verlaagd-a4150323
2/5
 12/5/22, 12:45 PM The Netherlands' lowest polder shows why water levels can no longer be lowered - NRC
farmers, taken by the general board of
Adjusting the water level is no longer possible,
the Rotterdam Water Board. "That is
says dike grave Toon van der Klugt of
special," says the dike grave. "Everyone sees in
the Schieland Water Board
that adjusting the water level is no longer possible.
and Krimpenerwaard.
We did insist that the municipality and
province to come to a good
future prospects."
The decision is a rather ideal illustration of the usefulness and necessity of the policy that
the cabinet announced last week, in which water and soil will henceforth be "guiding"
will be in the spatial planning of the country. "Confidence in the
social engineering of our landscape is great. But in the meantime we are increasingly running into
the limits of the water and soil system," wrote Minister Mark Harbers
(Water Management, VVD) in a parliamentary letter. "Soil subsidence and low water levels cause
much damage to building foundations and extra maintenance on roads and
railroads. Sufficient good drinking water can no longer be taken for granted. The
survival of plant and animal species is under pressure."
Some measures advocated by the cabinet: no more building should be done in
areas needed to store and drain water, such as floodplains and the
deepest parts of deep polders; and the Netherlands should strive for a higher
groundwater level, because that provides sufficient water when it does not rain for a while, inhibits the
decline of peat soils and reduces greenhouse gas emissions.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/in-de-laagste-polder-van-nederland-is-te-zien-waarom-het-waterpeil-niet-meer-kan-worden-verlaagd-a4150323 3/5
 12/5/22, 12:45 PM The Netherlands' lowest polder shows why water levels can no longer be lowered - NRC
er EE
 
AND THEY PAD
In part of the Zuidplaspolder, reclaimed nearly two hundred years ago,
between Rotterdam, Zoetermeer and Gouda, it can be seen that such policies are not
future, but already dire necessity. This is the first area, as far as
known, in which the "kink point" has been reached. The Restveen, part of the polder
between Moordrecht and Nieuwerkerk aan den IJssel of almost four hundred hectares, consists
of peat that continues to dry out every year and actually burns and shrinks. As a result
the increasingly light soil can no longer withstand the upward pressure of the
groundwater. The soil bursts open and poor quality groundwater damages
to farmland, wildlife and inhabited habitat. That effect is even greater here in the lowest
of the Netherlands. Elsewhere in the polder, the soil also
to burst without measures. "On all sides you then get stuck," says Van der Klugt.
Read also:
Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/in-de-laagste-polder-van-nederland-is-te-zien-waarom-het-waterpeil-niet-meer-kan-worden-verlaagd-a4150323 4/5
 12/5/22, 12:45 PM The Netherlands' lowest polder shows why water levels can no longer be lowered - NRC
In addition to the damage from poor-quality water, there is also the risk of subsidence elsewhere.
"There is a railroad line here. If that starts to subside, you're talking about a
million damage. The NS has already warned about that?" Other users such as
homeowners could be up in arms. The point of stopping the
downward water level lowering was known twenty years ago, when the province of
South Holland had plans to turn the Restveen into a piece of "wet nature" and
thereby counteracting subsidence. However, the plans fell through when the government
suddenly turned off the money tap. In the following years the level was not lowered 'for the time being?
lowered. As of now it is finally clear that there will be no more lowering of the level.
come. Van der Klugt: "The benefits no longer outweigh the costs. The time of
patience is over. The current water level is the starting point for everyone?"
Alternatives
The consequences of the decision will mainly be felt by a limited number of farmers and a few
horse owner will feel. Grazing cattle and harvesting grass, already a tour
de force in the rather wet area, will be increasingly difficult. "The farmers
understand that too. But this decision is also a signal to the province and the
municipality to start talking to the users about alternatives. "You could spend the
next ten or twenty years with lighter machines across the farmland still
drive, and later grow other crops or build solar parks. For example. Or still
create wetlands. "That could happen" Whether the rest of the Netherlands will follow suit?
"We don't know. Every area is different. We do it with reason"
A version of this article also appeared in the December 3, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/in-de-laagste-polder-van-nederland-is-te-zien-waarom-het-waterpeil-niet-meer-kan-worden-verlaagd-a4150323 5/5

