= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
REPORTAGE DAIRY
Milk on the Amstel for meadow birds
Local dairy A new dairy in Ouderkerk aan de Amstel is paying farmers
a premium the more they work for meadow birds. The bird-friendly
the bird-friendly dairy products for sale. "But don't expect meadow scent from the
milk carton."
Manon Stravens, Hans Ariëns 2May2019 Reading Time 3 minutes
Reading List U
 you!
Photo Rien Zilvold
 The "weed butter" and the polder cheese Round Round Hoep" were already there,
"Why didn't we also start selling our own milk in town?", looks
dairy farmer and cooperative chairman Kees Nieuwendijk looks back. The need for
regional products is growing. "A million people live here, there had to be a market
for that." Two years later, the factory was Amstelgoed Natuurzuivel, the fruit of
a collaboration between 21 farmers, Vogelbescherming Nederland and
co-financier Wijland, was a reality.
The landscape around the expanding capital is still open and vast. The
cows walk there - unlike in intensive livestock farming - from the middle of April to the middle of
October in the pasture. "Remarkably, therefore, Amstelland is one of the few areas
where the meadow bird population is maintained," says Kees de Pater of the
Bird Protection. Threatened mostly by intensive agriculture, the godwit,
redshank, lapwing and oystercatcher throughout the Netherlands have been declining in numbers for years, but in
the marshy peat meadow area of Amstelland they benefit from the high
water level. And from some forty meadow bird-minded farmers.
Flowers, herbs and late mowing
"Most of the farmers are doing something in nature management," says De Pater. "They
mow late, reserve a piece of grassland for flowers and herbs. That attracts
insects and worms and the chicks are safe from predators there, That's what
the birds like." The cooperative is going to reward that effort according to a points system
with a share of the profit, on top of the guaranteed price offered by Friesland Campina,
 Not the best milk, but the best effort for the birds counts. Participating meat
Meat farmers who do not supply milk can also compete.
Realizing this idea took a lot of doing. Such as long negotiations
with customer FrieslandCampina, which previously allowed individual farmers to buy a few
a few liters, maximum 10 percent, of milk to make their own cheese. For
for the first time, a group of farmers will now be exempted from jointly supplying a third of their
milk to supply their own factory. "FrieslandCampina is an oil tanker, too
big to achieve this in their own factories. But they know they
have to do something with this desire for regional products. So they support our initiative."
says Nieuwendijk.
They initially turned down the Rabobank with their request for financing. Too
risky, such a start-up. Even though the bank has been calling for ages for
regional products and biodiversity. Quite a disappointment, says Nieuwendijk.
"Almost all members are financed by Rabobank, why don't you support the
initiative of your entrepreneurs?" Now the plant and equipment has been subsidized and
a loan from the National Green Fund. Meanwhile, they are again in talks with
the Rabobank in talks.
Also read
Ecological farming in exchange for land
Selling dairy proved to be the biggest challenge. Nieuwendijk: "Farming is still simple.
farming is still simple." De Pater: "We are competing in a saturated market. People
 are interested and enthusiastic, but when push comes to shove, you run into
wholesalers and buyers. We have enthusiastic farmers and favor factor of
companies, but we have to find enough buyers" Contracts with the
Isbreeker, IJscuypie and supermarket Margt are in. With potential customers
such as the AMG and restaurants on the Zuidas are still in talks.
Leaving the milk alone
Don't expect a "pasture smell" from the milk carton. The cream collar will also come off ("not
everyone likes that"). Furthermore, the factory will leave the raw milk
alone. For taste. Because the usually "pulling, pumping, slurping and
centrifuging" breaks down the milk, according to the dairy farmer. So there is also
no skim milk, half-full at most. "But I don't know if we should want that.
First we have to get those machines." Then chuckling, "and then make cottage cheese
from it." The factory first supplies atteen whole milk, later yogurt and
cottage cheese. Consumers will soon be able to buy a carton of Boeren van Amstel from
supermarkets in Amstelland and at Margt (price: around 1.40 euros).
The city is advancing, large houses are rising on the expensive land along the Amstel, resulting in
cluttering as a result. "See that as a threat or an opportunity," says
Nieuwendijk, "The city comes to us, people come into the polder to see farmers
see farmers." Who organize polder safaris and other forms of recreation, himself running
he and his wife run the Boer tent campground. "People prefer that to a
city hotel."
 The dairy offers many opportunities, De Pater believes. "A short chain is better for
the climate and in time subsidies may stop. This milk keeps
both farmers and meadow birds."
Also read
about a farmer who put part of his meadow
voluntarily flooded for the godwit
A version of this article also appeared in NRC Handelsblad on May 4, 2019.
Email the editors MA
Share 9%
My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About us
Working at
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
 NN W f ©) EH

