12/10/22, 10:09 AM Modern agriculture is disastrous for biodiversity. But not in the Ooijpolder, butterflies flutter off and on there - NRC
Note: Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
07:12
Reportage
Modern agriculture is
disastrous for biodiversity.
But not in the
Ooijpolder, there the
butterflies flutter to and fro
Biodiversity in the polder Hawthorn hedges and pools enrich
nature in the countryside, and suppress insect pests.
"A great success.
Ö MarcelaandeBrugh © 8december2022 ÒReading time 4 minutes
 12/10/22, 10:09 AM Modern agriculture is disastrous for biodiversity. But not in the Ooijpolder, where butterflies flutter to and fro - NRC
'ni Er
f
While governments are meeting these weeks in Montreal to discuss better protection of
biodiversity, professor of plant ecology Hans de Kroon and PhD student Robin
Lexmond show what has already been achieved over the past fifteen years in the rural area of the
Ooijpolder, near Nijmegen. How butterflies are fluttering to and fro again. How
orchids have started to bloom.
Read also:
The rate of extinction of animals and plants was not so high in
ten million years
"But this is pretty much the worst day to show that," says De Kroon. At
this Monday morning, late fall, it is gray, dreary and drizzly. Just as Lexmond
jokingly says that biodiversity "is way off right now," a wren lands in
a bush nearby, and hops from branch to branch.
Modern, large-scale agriculture is one of the major contributors to the
decline in biodiversity. In the tropics, rainforest is being cleared and converted into
farmland, mainly pastures for livestock, or fields to grow fodder on. In
Europe after World War II, biodiversity has suffered mainly from the
intensification of agriculture: the emergence of vast monocultures with high
inputs of (artificial) fertilizers and pesticides. According to inventories by the
Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, the declining trend of
biodiversity in natural areas has, on average, now come to a halt.
In rural areas, however, the decline continues.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/08/moderne-landbouw-is-funest-voor-biodiversiteit-maar-niet-in-de-ooijpolder-daar-fladderen-de-vlinders-af-en-aan-...
2/6
 12/10/22, 10:09 AM Modern agriculture is disastrous for biodiversity. But not in the Ooijpolder, butterflies flutter to and fro there - NRC
But not in the Ooijpolder. Many farmers here signed contracts some fifteen years ago
signed contracts to free up pieces of their land for so-called landscape elements.
We pass them as we walk between the meadows and fields. Rows of
pollard willows, hawthorn hedges, herb-rich strips along the fields, pools, faded
bank slopes. In exchange, farmers receive long-term compensation - for maintenance and
lost income. "Especially that guaranteed compensation for 30 years is very
important," says De Kroon. In the distance, an egret perches in a pond.
Icarus blue
As we pass a row of pollarded willows, and blue tits chattering along
Lexmond enthusiastically lists the butterfly species she has seen in the area this summer.
she has already seen in the area last summer. "Icarus blue, tadpoles, brown sandpipers, little
veined whites, as well as more special species like brown blue and orange alfalfa butterfly."
The Crown is coordinating a project started last year that explores how to restore biodiversity
in rural areas can be restored. Through NWO's National Science Agenda, more than
over 4 million euros made available for it. The project will last five years, he says.
Besides in the Ooijpolder, the research also runs in the western Dutch bulb-growing region
and in the peat meadow area of the Alblasserwaard. "Hey look," Lexmond says. She points
to a field of corn stubble. A hare scurries away.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/08/moderne-landbouw-is-funest-voor-biodiversiteit-maar-niet-in-de-ooijpolder-daar-fladderen-de-vlinders-af-en-aan-.... 3/6
 Modern agriculture is disastrous for biodiversity. But not in the Ooijpolder, there the butterflies flutter off and on - NRC
AND IN X 8 SIDES SENA 8 | ' 7 - 7 7 U > Se STAN RENS SN
N \ ABN Ay Ki e/ / ; Ni, 2 NN TK °
AN AN IONA N ie 740 %, hz BMA NR NE
\ N N KV Ns ES S ) Il 4 pe lar N hy Í Í Î
\ N SN N ► Sk 3 / ◄ 4 PT TN Seb Ù N kl
N RN EAR Al EIL IE- iN A XL SENA DN À
X \ HN DSN NN NN fe Ô ì y / / Ls BS Ae qa i
4 Æ EN 4 _N N Ô ì y / / N pd £ Î i Æ AN + N Ô ì y
A N & eN \/ Aid Vs" \ Î k BK Î
'N KNB AKN Ei / VL FS \ RE
Hans de Kroon and Robin Lexmond show what has already been accomplished in the past fifteen years in the
countryside of the Ooijpolder.
Photo Flip Franssen ta
The project coordinated by De Kroon has a link to the Delta Plan set up in 2018.
Biodiversity Restoration, an alliance of nature organizations, farmers
governments, businesses and knowledge institutions. Last September, they handed over to
Minister Van der Wal (VVD, Nature and Nitrogen) a plan to restore 10
percent of the countryside with landscape elements. Until 2030, 7.5
billion euros in long-term compensation for this.
For this plan, Wageningen researchers mapped the usefulness and effect of
landscape elements. Various functions were investigated,
explains Irene Bouwma on the phone. Capturing CO", better control
of insect pests in crops, water infiltration, air purification. "Especially those first
two functions stand out clearly," says Bouwma. That actually makes sense, too. "A
row of pollarded willows captures more CO} than a barbed wire. "And all those
landscape elements provide additional habitat, protection and nutrition for all kinds of species,
she says, "From those hawthorn hedges or herb-rich strips, they also migrate into the crops
into, and suppress pests there"
Skylark
An initial analysis of changes in
biodiversity, by the Bargerveen Foundation. Ecologist Marijn Nijssen co-wrote the
report. He explains that they made a comparison between areas where deliberate
landscape elements have been created, and areas nearby without those elements.
"Bird species like the warbler and the skylark clearly did better in areas with these elements.
That was also true for many insects, and a species like the crested newt,
says Nijssen. A combination of different landscape elements seemed to work best.
work. Nijssen calls the initiative in the Ooijpolder "a great success. It
incidentally, he says, it still matters how the elements are maintained. "Farmers have
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/08/moderne-landbouw-is-funest-voor-biodiversiteit-maar-niet-in-de-ooijpolder-daar-fladderen-de-vlinders-af-en-aan-.... 4/6
 12/10/22, 10:09 AM Modern agriculture is disastrous for biodiversity. But not in the Ooijpolder, where butterflies flutter to and fro - NRC
the tendency to want to keep the landscape very neat
landscape. We say: it could be a bit
sloppier." wao!
Nijmegen 4
1km
NRC 093222'/ RL
Also read:
Hurry to prevent new mass extinction
prevent, say biologists and ecologists
The Crown recognizes that picture. His father was a farmer. "He always told me: a sloppy
farmer is a bad farmer" Creating and managing landscape elements requires a
different mindset. "But many farmers really do have a heart for nature."
We walk past a field of rapeseed. At the edge is a hawthorn hedge. The red
berries are still attached here and there. Lexmond says she also wants to investigate
how the landscape elements are used by the various species.
"Do they only function as transit routes, or also as habitats?"
We come to a pond with a reed bed on one side. The pond is dry. While
autumn is almost over. De Kroon is startled. "A few years ago I saw great crested newts here.
This drought is a sign of climate change, he says.
The Rhine and its extension, the Waal, is changing from a river fed in part by
melting snow, into a river that receives only rainwater. The
summers are getting drier, and then the river is drawing water away from its surroundings. "That's going to be
a huge, additional challenge"
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/08/moderne-landbouw-is-funest-voor-biodiversiteit-maar-niet-in-de-ooijpolder-daar-fladderen-de-vlinders-af-en-aan-.... 5/6
 12/10/22, 10:09 AM Modern agriculture is disastrous for biodiversity. But not in the Ooijpolder, butterflies flutter off and on there - NRC
A version of this article also appeared in the December 9, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/08/moderne-landbouw-is-funest-voor-biodiversiteit-maar-niet-in-de-ooijpolder-daar-fladderen-de-vlinders-af-en-aan-.... 6/6

