= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
OPINION
Switch to organic farming - I have
no regrets
Organic farmer Ard van Gaalen has been running an
organic farm. That is tougher than "conventional" farming and less lucrative. Yet
it pays off.
February 1, 2024 Reading time 3 minutes
Listening d) Reading list
 OIUE . cf ZOUUE u col VVddl DCE " u c dd OIPZE £_ VIOERZE
. IJ . Photo Bram Petraeus
the elderly. They had just been liberated after the war by the advent of chemical
 pesticides and fertilizers. They no longer had to weed - always with
that crooked back. Their crops no longer failed.
And now we were going back to pre-war methods? They didn't know then how
exhausting those means and methods were for the soil.
For most farmers, sustainability is too expensive, a study last
week from research by Wageningen University. I
understand that. Also, only 4.4 percent of farmers work
organic. The rest do it the conventional way - that's what
that's what we call it. Switching over on your own is also impossible.
You are more vulnerable as an organic farmer: you have the occasional
crop failure, for example. The fight against the weeds is
heavy, and without chemicals you can't control all
fungi and insects.
Ard van Gaalen is an
organic farmer in South Africa.
Our way of working is also much more labour intensive than
Beijerland.
that of conventional farming. We work together
until late at night, we eat together. Yet we also take it in turns
take turns on vacation, to recharge the battery. In the summer, thirty to
40 migrant workers work for us in the summer. We now have weed robots on the road, on a
trial, which is a hopeful development.
Potatoes, carrots, onions and cows
 We could never have made the switch from conventional to organic on our own.
make it. But we merged our three farms in 1999. That was our
salvation. We now have 300 acres together. We and our families can
still make a living. We grow potatoes, carrots, onions, red beets, parsnips,
peas, celeriac. And we have two hundred cows, from the milk we make
cheese.
Common farmers have a higher yield per acre than we do. Dutch
farmers are insanely efficient - the best in the world. They concentrate on
one or two crops. We have several; we do that to get the soil to
rest. I don't want to give the impression that organic farmers are better than
conventional. But I think it is smarter to farm on the safe side of our
ecological limit and develop a more resistant agriculture. So
bring in as little animal feed, fertilizer and minerals from outside Europe as possible.
We now grow our carrots so efficiently that they are almost as cheap
as non-organic carrots
Our biggest customers are Germans. Germans are more aware of green and
local than the Dutch. In the Netherlands, consumers look first and foremost at the
price of a product on the shelf. So if there are cheap grapes from Peru, or
green beans from Egypt, the consumer buys them. I think that in these
 cases, the real price is often not calculated, and so we saddle others
others with the consequences for their environment.
A fruit grower here in the polder had at least thirty trucks of beautiful
apples in his cold store. Yet at the same time apples from
Argentina were in the store at the same time. They were cheaper, but of course more damaging to the climate.
the climate. That should be banned.
Organic products are often slightly more expensive; not always. We now grow our carrots
so efficiently that they are almost as cheap as non-organic carrots. But they
are in stores for a higher price. Consumers are not always willing yet
to pay that higher - and fairer - price.
Many find the step too risky
Organic farming is a wonderful profession. We don't deplete the soil. We have -
scientifically proven - more insects, flowers and bird species on the
organic farm. We also have less nitrogen emissions. Many conventional
farmers want this too, they tell us. They just find the step to organic
farming too big, too risky. You will then have to grow many more crops to
diseases and pests, need more equipment and staff.
We also have fields of herbs and clovers in the winter, which we use again
to feed the cows. The roots of those herbs and clovers are good for the
soil. We return the manure from our cows to the land, and so we close
 the mineral cycle again. That makes you happy as a farmer. It doesn't make you rich
from it, but it works.
My kids are studying science & innovation, biology and international politics.
They say: well dad, how you farm is very complex. I don't know if they are
farming is going to take over.
For the future of organic farmers, and the growth of the number, especially
the supermarkets are important. If they would buy organic on a larger scale,
organic food would also become cheaper. And if it becomes cheaper, more
more consumers want it. Chicken or egg: when do you start? They could also present organic
products could also present them much better and more prominently in the store, rather
instead of putting them in a corner somewhere.
The government should also do more. As the seat belt became mandatory,
solar panels subsidized and tobacco restricted, organic
consumption could be stimulated, for example by VAT rebates on organic
organic products. This way you can ensure that consumers can and will
pay for it. And that it becomes attractive for farmers to switch.
Written by Frederiek Weeda
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 2, 2024 newspaper.
Share <6 Mail the editors
 NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture no weakening
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest
milk
21 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take One
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About NRC
Working At
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

