Menu
nrc) WD Mining news dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital newspaper Q
OPINION
Double nature, it can be done
Nature Nature is everywhere, you just have to give it space writes
food forest ranger Kaat Biesernans-Hoogewijs. With these four measures, in ten
half a million hectares of new nature in ten years.
1maart2024om11:15 Reading time 5 minutes
Listening 4) Reading List
 Outdoor air does us good and greenery has a beneficial effect on body and Photo Eric Brinkhorst
 mind. On the other hand, this species disturbs the peace and habitat of all kinds of
other species. "Nature is too full," concludes the forester in despair and
so from now on it must be paid for and reserved. Your job
be your job: whistle in your mouth, fat-wheeled bike under your ass, notebook in your
pocket and off to write receipts and check entrance tickets. I
can imagine that the average forester started his career with different expectations.
his career.
You can also reason the other way around. There aren't too many people,
there is just (much) too little nature. The Netherlands has half a
million hectares of nature for 17 million people. That is just
less than three hundred square meters per person, the
area of a tennis court with along the four edges a
margin of one meter. That tennis court is what humans share with all the
other living plants and animals in that area.
By comparison, the Netherlands has nearly one million hectares
Kaat Biesemans-
grassland for 3.8 million cows-another large mammal.
Hoogewise
Each cow has an outdoor space of 2,500 square
food forest ranger.
meters. That's over a third of a soccer field, which she mainly
shares with blades of grass and earthworms. A cow in
the Netherlands roughly eight times more outdoor space than a human. We are
short of it.
 Read also
Nature is not full, but wrongly designed
The problem is that in the Netherlands we have a very narrow definition of nature.
We have divided nature into categories and management types with target species
and we anxiously try to keep this paper classification intact in the real
world, on tightly defined patches of land. In reality
nature dynamic, potentially ubiquitous and averse to cadastral
boundaries. Bicycle and railroad verges, front, back and allotments, city parks,
schoolyards, tree-lined avenues, vacant lots, city wharves, fields, meadows,
ditches and ponds; in principle nature can go its own way everywhere, provided that
that we give it space and time and do not obstruct it.
Especially on farmland and in the countryside there is a world of dynamic new
dynamic new nature, by combining agriculture and nature and connecting them
regenerative agriculture.
This agriculture is based on four basic principles. One, cherish the soil, so do not
plowing, tilling, fluffing or flattening with heavy machinery. After all, half of
biodiversity is in the soil, which we want to protect. Two,
embrace and increase (bio)diversity, so we welcome all native fauna
and flora and we combine a multitude of crops. Three, no
pesticides of any kind. Pesticides destroy
 life and destroy diversity, Nature gets its resilience and balance precisely from
the vast diversity of living things and organisms, Four, no fertilizers,
Fertilizers disable soil life and make plants dependent on an
annual encore when, in cooperation with soil life, they are perfectly capable
are perfectly capable of feeding themselves.
If we apply these four basic principles to the outdoors, we can
with four solid measures in ten years time more than half a million hectares of
of new nature in ten years. That is a hefty doubling of the current
surface area, while maintaining food security. How do we go about this?
First, we flank all fences with mixed hedges. Hedges protect
the wind, provide nesting and hiding places for small birds, stimulate soil life
soil life underground, provide food and shelter for insects,
retain the soil with their roots, store rainwater and structure the
landscape. We can plant two hundred thousand kilometers of hedges in the Netherlands.
eventually become a mosaic of forty thousand hectares of
new nature,
Secondly, we provide ditches with nature-friendly banks.
space for specific water and riparian plants, attract water-loving birds and form
form a breeding ground for dragonflies and small amphibians. A ditch with a
bank multiplies its water storage capacity and the
diverse plantings also improve water quality. We have 330,000
kilometers of ditches, not all ditches qualify for nature-friendly
 banks but even with slightly less than half of the ditches, this provides 75,000
hectares of new nature.
Third, all field edges we sow with native flowers and herbs.
These attract all kinds of insects that pollinate crops and control pests.
These flower-rich edges provide 22,000 hectares of new nature and an enormous
biodiversity gain.
Fourth, the toughest float and at the same time the biggest hit, the grasslands
and corn fields. We all know that livestock must shrink. If we
gradually, we can already fill the grasslands with shrubs and trees,
which will provide substitute products for the farmer. Berries, fruits, nuts,
insulation and building materials, vegetables (yes, quite a few shrubs and trees you can
eat the leaves as vegetables), personal care products. At halving the livestock population
we can convert at least three hundred thousand acres of grassland and ninety thousand
hectares of corn into tree meadows, biodiverse orchards and
food forests.
Read also
Which should get more space: nature or agriculture
and housing? The Netherlands is divided
Finally, the question on which many a benevolent farmer and landowner is racking their
brain: how are we going to finance this? Because subsidies for nature are
 minimal and it takes several years before the new nature bears fruit,
literally and figuratively.
Behold my proposal. The European Union, through the Green Deal and the eco-
schemes of the Common Agricultural Policy, the European Union can make a first serious
in the bag. Our own government can contribute from the earmarked
funds for peak farmers, who in principle do not have to stop, but can radically redesign their
farm radically differently.
Moreover, it so happens that new European regulations require companies
to document and offset their environmental impact from 2024. No
nicer compensation imaginable than a few hectares of dynamic brand-new
nature. Furthermore, it would behoove the banks to provide generous and
interest-free financing, as banks also have to reduce their environmental impact.
reduce.
And importantly last, the citizens (you and me), are going to pay the farmer a fair price
pay for sustainable products and for a biodiverse landscape. The pioneers
of regenerative agriculture are proving that good money can be
can be made. A regenerative farm is a prime location for a
mini-camping site, a farm store, corporate outings, heath days, courses and
workshops, small-scale child and parent care, birthday and family parties,
yoga classes, photo shoots, local catering, the possibilities are endless. Experience
experience has also shown that some of the citizens enjoy working voluntarily on the farm.
the farm.
 Thus, an extraordinary alliance of banks, businesses, farmers and
citizens - with optimal cooperation from our government (read: a blank
permit for these four spatial projects) - can realize over half a million hectares of
new nature scattered throughout the Netherlands in ten years.
Homo recreans will then be able to indulge in that
new nature. And the forester? He can once again quietly go about his business with binoculars around his
can have a quiet chat with the nature lover who is bored
the old-style nature reserves.
Join the conversation and send a letter!
Would you like to respond to an article? Use this form to send a letter (maximum 250 words)
to the opinion editor of NRC.
A version of this article also appeared in the March 2, 2024 newspaper.
Share °% Mail the editors
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
 Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture no weakening
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest
milk
21 hours ago
About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Take an Editorial Mediahouse NRC
Work at subscription Opinion editorial NRC Careers
Copyright Login The Ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create an account Colophon NRC Readers' Fund
Delivery terms Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My Reading List Customer Service
Our app My subscriptions Family reports
Archive Service & Delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) E
 
