= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
OPINION
The wheel must change: only with fair prices
can the farmer spare nature
Agriculture Consumers must pay more for milk, meat and vegetables, writes
Dirk Schoenmaker. Only then can the farmer spare nature.
February 2024 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening 4) Reading List
 roll back necessary regulations. The honest story is that food prices
 have to go up.
An adequate earnings model is the starting point to get out of the
agricultural impasse in Europe. Farmers, because of
low margins now do not have the financial room to implement all the
environmental regulations, and are annoyed by increasing
interference from "the city" (the government) in the countryside.
Also read: https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2024/02/01/stap-over-
Dirk Schoenmaker is
op-biologisch-boeren-ik-heb-er-geen-spijt-van-a4188818
professor of finance at
Erasmus University and
member of the Sustainable
No longer queues food bank
Finance Lab.
The challenge is not to make this transition via large
subsidy flows to producers (the supply side).
done, as current European agricultural policy does. I propose to do it through the
consumer (Demand side) via a "fair" price in the supermarket for
healthy agricultural products, created with respect for nature and animals.
arrived at. A fair price means that the social side (an adequate income
for the farmer) and the environmental side (costs of meeting standards for nature
animals) are included in the price, and are no longer passed on to society.
passed on to society.
The price for vegetables, fruits, meat and dairy will then be higher. Flanking social
policy for lower income groups is needed to compensate them for those
 increased prices. In Brussels jargon, this is called "a
 
just transition'. This is very important
from a social perspective; longer lines at the food banks should
really be avoided.
French President Macron had forgotten this compensation when introducing
higher fuel taxes in France. This led to the great protest movement of
the yellow jackets. And then the excise tax increase was reversed, as is now happening in
Brussels is happening with environmental rules and the diesel excise tax for agriculture.
Fair prices are a correction to the too-low food prices of recent
decades. Due to economies of scale and intensification, fueled by Brussels
subsidies, prices have fallen. While before World War II food was still
made up 29 percent of the family budget, that has now fallen to 13 percent.
Supermarkets also play a major role; they have market power in the chain
between farmer and consumer and are responsible for a continuous reduction
of the milk price. It therefore requires concerted action to achieve fair prices
including compensation for the lowest incomes.
The scaling up and intensification of agriculture are the main causes of
the degradation in nature. Cheap fodder from Latin America and
large-scale use of artificial fertilizers have not only increased production, but also
also increased nitrogen emissions and manure surpluses. Use of pesticides and
penicillin leads to unhealthy food and loss of soil and water quality.
Compliance with the European Water Directive is the next problem that
emerging.
 Key question
So a change of direction is needed. It is still searching for the form: central
government regulation, regional regulation or self-regulation with sanctions. The
government must work with the industry to build a future-proof business model.
build.
The key question is what do we do with the world market price of food. In the case of the
carbon tax a good solution has been found. To prevent relocation of
carbon-intensive production abroad, the
European Union introduced a levy on imports of carbon-intensive
goods. Such a border tax for non-environmentally friendly products can also be introduced in
agriculture. Europe is thus exporting its environmental policies.
Pressing the pause button, as now, when environmental regulations are introduced, offers no
solace. Intensive farmers can no longer get a loan from the bank;
farm conversions or acquisitions are at a standstill. Organic farmers are struggling
the extra costs with no prospect of 'fair' compensation. With the
structural solution of fair prices, the agricultural sector can get out of this impasse.
come out of this impasse.
A version of this article also appeared in the Feb. 8, 2024 newspaper.
Share Mail the editors
 AGRICULTURE AND CATTLE BREEDING
The company 'Brothers C. and K. Kievit' is no more.
Oh well, what gives?
13 hours ago
Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture no weakening
16 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take One
NRC Media House
Editorial staff
About NRC
Working At
Opinion Editor
NRC Careers
subscription
Login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The Ombudsman
NRC Readers' Fund
Create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Delivery conditions
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My Subscriptions
Family reports
Our app
Archive
Service & Delivery
Advertising
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

