12/5/22, 12:43 PM Remkes' tone is 'fine,' but he doesn't take away the anger and distrust - NRC
Note: Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
05:11
Interview
Remkes' tone is fine, but he doesn't take away the
anger and mistrust away
Farmers Farmers were anxiously awaiting Remkes' findings. "We
can't suddenly start growing corn," says Alien van Zijtveld.
Ö ArjenSchreuder © 5October2022 ÒReading time 3 minutes
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/05/remkes-toon-is-fijn-maar-hij-neemt-de-woede-en-het-wantrouwen-niet-weg-a4 144283 1/5
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM Remkes' tone is 'fine,' but he doesn't take away the anger and distrust - NRC
Her three children, aged eight, six and two, have been taken elsewhere, time for
farmer's wife Alien van Zijtveld (30), sitting behind a cup of soup at the kitchen table, to hear via the
laptop, to hear directly how Johan Remkes thinks things should proceed with the
farmers in the Netherlands. "I have no great expectations from it," says Van Zijtveld. Together
with her husband Pieter (31), she owns a dairy farm in the Overijssel region of
Rouveen, with more than a hundred cows.
Remkes' tone initially fell well with Van Zijtveld, secretary of Agractie, a
somewhat moderate action group that fights for the interests of farmers in times of
nitrogen policy. "Fine," she sighs when Remkes speaks from The Hague about a country
in which there is room for farmers, "including young farmers."
But when Remkes finishes his explanation, disappointment still prevails. Especially
about his advice to convince farmers who live close to European protected areas
to "change their farming practices", to entice them to move or voluntarily
and, if that fails, to expropriate. "Quitting is terrible, if you as a farmer
don't choose to do it yourself. It's a life's work" And another management? "How should
we do that? We are here on peat soil. We grow grass for our cows, we
can't suddenly start growing corn or anything like that"
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/05/remkes-toon-is-fijn-maar-hij-neemt-de-woede-en-het-wantrouwen-niet-weg-a4 144283 2/5
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM Remkes' tone is 'fine,' but he doesn't take away the anger and distrust - NRC
Farmer Alien van Zijtveld watches the presentation of the report.
Photo Eric Brinkhorst ta
Big mud creeper
Alien van Zijtveld does not know if her farm will face government action. The
cows are more than a kilometer and a half away from Olde Maten and Veerslootslanden,
a Natura 2000 area where, according to the description, mainly unfertilized blue grasslands
are worth protecting, as well as the big mud creeper. "Never heard of it," laughs
she. Whether her dairy farm is among the "peak loaders" that are near natural areas
according to the government, emit too much nitrogen, she doesn't know either. "When are you a
peak belaster? That can't be determined. Moreover, you can never argue that because of the
nitrogen from your company that one piece of nature has become less valuable."
However, she is pleased with Remkes' opinion that the critical deposition value, the
the limit of what a nature area can absorb too much nitrogen, should not be canonized and that
and that the main focus should be on the state of nature itself,
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/05/remkes-toon-is-fijn-maar-hij-neemt-de-woede-en-het-wantrouwen-niet-weg-a4 144283 3/5
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM Remkes' tone is 'fine', but he doesn't take away the anger and distrust - NRC
Van Zijtveld: "Then it often turns out it's not about nitrogen but about water or soil" Also
pleased she is with Remkes' criticism of the government's actions in recent years.
"The problem is not nitrogen, the problem is an unreliable government," she says.
"Look how many farmers are out of touch."
She lists a number of measures that have made farmers' lives just about impossible
especially the system of phosphate rights established a few years ago for
farmers who just moments before had been allowed to expand the number of cows, has
caused a lot of misery. "Many farmers are the victims of failing government policies. The
policy is lousy, it flies from left to right. The other day I was sitting with my six-year-old daughter
at the wheel of the tractor, She steered too far to the left and then too much back to the
right and so she swerved across the land. Until I said: look for a spot in the distance, a
tree for example, and steer towards that tree. All at once she went straight. It is the same way with
the government. What is missing is a solid plan with a clear goal for agriculture."
The Netherlands is about much more than nitrogen, she is convinced. "What if
Netherlands soon has solved this nitrogen problem? Then there will be other
problems" With the quality of water, for example, or the excess manure. Personally, the
the Van Zijtveld family took over her parents-in-law's farm earlier this year and
is now expanding. They still don't have enough land to spread the manure of all their
cows.
Buying out peak farmers
Her phone calls, chairman Bart Kemp wants to discuss a response to the plans
of Remkes. It is mixed: the plans for buying out peak farmers he calls
"incendiary" but he is pleased that Remkes signals that the government is "making big
mistakes". After the telephone consultation, Van Zijtveld shows off her cows, as well as the
purchase of two milking robots that have made manually milking the cows three times a day
has made manual milking unnecessary. What she "lacks," she says, is a clear government. "We have
expanded our business. Because we want to make money. Our business is heavily financed
and we want to pay off. But do we get the chance to do that? I don't think so. Soon we'll have
we'll have climbed a big mountain, be at the top, and then, plop, another
a new measure and you're down. Then you can start all over again."
Playing on her phone is a video with a song about a country proud of farmers.
Launched Wednesday. "This song is about how you can work together to build a beautiful country.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/05/remkes-toon-is-fijn-maar-hij-neemt-de-woede-en-het-wantrouwen-niet-weg-a4 144283 4/5
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM Remkes' tone is 'fine,' but he doesn't take away the anger and distrust - NRC
children"
Farmer Alien van Zijtveld's cows.
Photo Eric Brinkhorst ta
Also read:
Remkes expects 'legal bumps' in stopping
big nitrogen polluters
Read also:
'Here I have to explain why no reverse
flag flying'
A version of this article also appeared in the newspaper of October 6, 2022
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/05/remkes-toon-is-fijn-maar-hij-neemt-de-woede-en-het-wantrouwen-niet-weg-a4 144283 5/5

