= Menu MEC)" WD Mining News dg} Podcasts [EF] Digital Newspaper Q
BACKGROUND
Still no forced buyout of
farms and manure processors in
Flanders
Approach to nitrogen emissions An approach to reducing
nitrogen emissions has also been presented. The initial sharp edges have been filed down.
filed.
Martin Kuiper 14november2023 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening (d) Reading List A
 \.' Flemish
Government
HIICISIN Nell KNAKEN, KECUAL SSL ue ee ACLU AL
iste hal Demir (t eed of right idens.de rsC gente overthesttofakeor in Flanders.
party N-VA
 
Nibe tab Ei deere
inet got the task to hist sti eem in
Photo Jasper Jacobs/Belga
Flanders to solve.
 "The nitrogen file is Flanders' longest dragging environmental file ever and has been
haunted around here for years," Demir said by phone. On Monday evening, the
Flemish government reached an agreement that also seems to pass legal muster -
after three years. "It was an emergency landing," Demir says.
She means: she would have preferred otherwise, but the sharp edges of her
nitrogen approach have been filed off. In Flanders, too, farmers will not be
forced to stop farming, whereas this was initially the intention
was.
Read also
Agricultural sector not keen on buyout, farmers
boycott site that shows whether they belong to peak-loaders
A few years back, the Dutch government watched lickingly as Demir
presented a straightforward approach - so much guts. The Flemish minister forced
without blinking an eye to force the 40 biggest emitters -
farms and manure processors ( so called "red companies") - before 2030 to
stop. Those companies would receive compensation for doing so. Demir said
about this at the time in NRG: "I'm not throwing the farmers in front of the bus, I'm not keeping them any longer
on the line." An "emissions threshold" would make it impossible for farmers who exceeded a
a certain threshold, moreover, would no longer be able to
expand their business.
Legally complicated
 But the plans turned out to be "legally complicated," Demir now says. The 40
largest emitters do not have to stop if they manage to cut their emissions by
halve, writes the Flemish government in the agreement. "But this will be very difficult for
them," Demir emphasizes.
Farmers can, for example, implement innovative techniques in their barns that will
reduce emissions, but then the devices have to prove that they do what they
promise. A scientific committee will look at this on a farm-by-farm basis.
she says. In the Netherlands, scientific studies in recent years have
shown that innovative solutions often yield less return than
promised.
Another option is for these farmers to keep fewer animals, Demir says. The
number of animals will then have to be sharply reduced. "That won't be an interesting
business model for them anymore."
The Dutch government first looked with licking eyes at the
Flemish approach
The emission threshold is off the table; it too proved legally untenable. Farmers
may expand provided they can demonstrate in advance through an environmental study that
 nature is not subjected to any additional burden.
Again, each farm is considered individually.
The nitrogen problem in Flanders is reminiscent of the problems in
Netherlands and began in the same way. A Belgian environmental club two years
ago appealed against the expansion of a poultry farmer in the village of
Kortesem. The latter wants to keep double the number of chickens, some 180,000, but could not
prove that this expansion would not put an additional burden on nearby nature reserves.
Letting it slip
The judge also seized the court case to let Flanders know that
Flanders had abandoned the nitrogen approach for years and had done nothing to reduce
emissions. What transpired: on more than three quarters of the vulnerable
nature reserves - 61 in total - more nitrogen was deposited than is allowed under European
regulations. The surface of Flanders is a third of the Dutch
land area, some 40 million farm animals are kept there.
A tough approach, in which farmers were not spared, had to ward off the nitrogen crisis.
to ward off the nitrogen crisis. Ís this approach a failure? "Not at all," says Demir. The deadline
of 2030 has not been tampered with, she says. Half of the natural areas must then
meet European standards by then. And the reduction of the pig population, 30 percent
fewer pigs by 2030, also remains intact. Just like the ban on spreading
of manure.
 Read also
In addition to the 2,500 already known farmers
possibly thousands of other agricultural companies
Also illegally spreading nitrogen
From 2030, the Flemish government wants to expand its nitrogen approach to a
broader approach that goes beyond nitrogen emission reduction and also
drought and water issues.
"We are a lot further along than the Netherlands," Demir said. She hopes that the
nitrogen approach in Flanders begins in 2024. "In terms of the nitrogen approach, the Netherlands is
nowhere at all yet."
A version of this article also appeared in the Nov. 15, 2023, newspaper.
Share 9% Mail the editor
AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
The company 'Brothers C. and K. Kievit' is no more.
Oh well, what gives?
12 hours ago
 Minister Adema finds animal-friendly measures
for agriculture no weakening
16 hours ago
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Take an Editorial Media House NRC
Work at subscription Opinion editorial NRC Careers
Copyright Login The Ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create an account Colophon NRC Readers' Fund
Delivery terms Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My Reading List Customer Service
Our app My subscriptions Family reports
Archive Service & Delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH

