= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
NEWS
Provinces do not always have to act
against farmers without a nitrogen permit,
according to the Council of State
PAS reporters Environmental movement Mobilization for the Environment had business
filed against various provinces to prevent enforcement of nature regulations
force. Provinces must start enforcement by mid-2025.
Flóri Hofman February 28, 2024 Reading time
 
1 minute
Listening d) Reading list A
 Sr Tue
A dairy farm in the Overijssel town of Markelo.
detectors. The Council of State made this clear in a case involving P
 Photo Eric Brinkhorst
environmental organization Mobilization for the Environment (MOB) against several
provinces, which revolved around three PAS detectors, but provinces must do well
argue that there is a 'reasonable balance' between the interests of the
companies on the one hand and nature on the other. From mid-2025 onwards
provinces of the Council of State will enforce.
PAS reporters are organizations, mainly farms, that were registered between 2015 and 2015
2019 reported an expansion or change to their company under
the then existing Nitrogen Approach Program (PAS). That program took care of that
these companies did not have to apply for a nature permit at the time
their nitrogen deposition remained below a certain value. The Council ruled in 2019
of State that the PAS was in conflict with European legislation that stipulates Natura 2000
areas must be protected.
The 2019 ruling caused thousands of companies to operate formally at once
illegal and risked fines. This is still one of the most complicated
parts of the government's nitrogen file. It barely worked so far
to help illegally operating companies, partly because there are few
nitrogen space from farmers who have stopped can be allocated to companies without it
permit. It was decided not to cause immediate problems for the PAS reporters
many provinces cannot enforce the nitrogen rules.
'Pressure on the cabinet'
 Mobilization for the Environment took action against several provinces
take legal action to ensure that they enforce the rules of nature.
The organization was proven right in Overijssel in May 2022, resulting in dozens of victims
farmers were threatened with hefty nitrogen fines. The case on which the Council of State
ruled on Wednesday, concerned three cases: a bio-power plant in Balkbrug and a
dairy farm in Kampen, both in Overijssel, and a meat processor in the
Utrecht IJsselstein.
The highest administrative court deviates from the decision with Wednesday's ruling
court in Overijssel. According to Johan Vollenbroek, chairman of MOB, the
statement “pressure on the cabinet” to resolve the problems with the PAS detectors at the latest
2025 to be solved. “A right-wing cabinet will never succeed in this.”
Also read
In addition to the 2,500 already known farmers
possibly thousands of other agricultural companies
Also illegally emitting nitrogen
Share 9 Email the editor Z
AGRICULTURE AND LIVESTOCK
 The company 'Gebroeders C. and K. Kievit' is no more.
Oh well, what does it matter?
11 hours ago
EL
 
nnen
 
el ED EN and En nn
Î Î
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
15 hours ago
My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©)
