= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
BACKGROUND
Ecological Authority: government must
'urgent' intervention for neglected ones
nature reserves to be 'effectively restored'
Nature Many protected nature reserves are in very poor condition, according to one
government advisory body. “We need to take action now to protect our own
nature goals still to be achieved.” And not just in the areas themselves: also outside of them.
Arjen Schreuder January 26, 2024 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening d) Reading list A
 LJ Ke u Ke u UAL me JC u
CJ
. . _. es on: Photo Vincent Jannink
advice that was presented to outgoing minister Christianne van der on Friday
 instituted ago by Van der Wal to provide the ecological underpinnings of
assess government decisions.
“The government must and can now take emergency measures to achieve its own nature goals
still to be achieved,” the advisory body writes. With many of the most important
nature reserves, the Natura 2000 areas, are doing worse than they were years ago
were notified to the European Union as worthy of protection.
Further deterioration cannot be ruled out. “This situation is contrary to
national and European legislation.”
ee,
Endangered and valuable animal and plant species are disappearing,
while more general (sometimes alien, less desirable)
species are increasing rapidly in number
Ecological Authority — in advice to Minister Van der Wal
Measures are "urgent" and should not be limited to the boundaries of the
neglected nature reserves themselves. The environment must also be taken into account
be involved, according to the experts of the advisory body. “It's essential
a good understanding of the nature reserve within the entire landscape context.
Only then will the necessary measures for sustainable nature restoration be implemented
around the areas are clearly visible." Recreation would also be restricted here and there
must be laid.
 The effects of the surplus of nitrogen and the desiccation of natural soils are:
visible to everyone, according to the advice. “Endangered and valuable animals
plant species disappear, while more common (sometimes exotic, less so).
desirable) species are increasing sharply in number. In some cases there are only
common species remain, but even these are declining in numbers.” The latter is with
especially so in dry forests, dune areas, heathlands, raised bogs, fens and
barren grasslands.
Incomplete
According to the Ecological Authority, "effective restoration" of nature reserves can be achieved
almost 90 percent of cases can only be achieved through measures
take outside the area itself. “Consider making connections with
different nature, increasing the habitat for species, reducing it
of eutrophication in the environment to improve water quality or it
changes in a water level, to improve the availability of water in the area
can improve.”
For this advice, the advisory body assessed 70 of the 130 analyses, all of which
provinces have made of their nature reserves. This so-called
nature objective analyzes are “valuable” but in a number of cases incomplete,
the Authority notes. They do not always describe developments outside in this way
the protected nature reserves that prevent the deterioration of nature within them
cause.
 “This advice confirms what we have known for a long time, namely that our nature is under
pressure is on,” Minister Van der Wal said on Friday. She also mentions the analyses
of the Ecological Authority is important, because “insight into how nature functions
state was lacking", and according to her there was a need for this, because: "The longer we
wait, the bigger the task becomes.”
This message was supplemented at 2:45 PM with a response from the outgoing minister
Christianne van der Wal (Nature and Nitrogen, VVD).
Also read
This is the most vulnerable part of the Netherlands
Share e% Email the editor
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
 Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest one
milk
21 hours ago
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Hire an Editorial Team Mediahuis NRC
Working with a subscription Opinion editor NRC Carrière
Copyright Login The ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create account Colophon NRC Readers Fund
Terms of delivery Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My reading list Customer service
Our app My subscriptions Family messages
Archive Service & delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
