= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
BACKGROUND
No forced buyout after all
farms and manure processors
Flanders
Approach to nitrogen emissions There is also an approach to reducing nitrogen emissions in Flanders
nitrogen emissions presented. The initially sharp edges are gone
filed.
Martin Kuiper November 14, 2023 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening d) Reading list A
 \.' Flemish
Government
HIICISIN Nell KNAKEN, KECUAL SSL ue ee ACLU AL
ist hall Demir (sworn from the right idens.de rsC gente overhetsttofakeor in Flanders.
party N-VA
 
Nibe tab Ei deere
I haven't been given the task to record hist sti eem
Photo Jasper Jacobs/Belga
to solve in Flanders.
 “The nitrogen dossier is the longest-drawn-out environmental dossier in Flanders ever
has been haunting this place for years,” says Demir on the phone. Monday evening the
Flemish government an agreement that also appears to be legally acceptable -
after three years. “It was an emergency landing,” says Demir.
She means: she would have preferred something different, but the sharp edges of her
nitrogen approach have been filed off. Farmers will not become farmers in Flanders either
forced to stop their business, although this was initially the intention
used to be.
Also read
The agricultural sector is not keen on buying out, farmers
boycott site that shows whether they belong to peak loaders
A few years ago, the Dutch government watched Demir with a smile on his face
presented a straightforward approach - so much courage. The Flemish minister forced
the forty largest emitters without blinking an eye -
farms and manure processors (so-called 'red companies') - before 2030
fuses. These companies would receive compensation for this. Demir said
about this in NRG at the time: “I don't throw the farmers under the bus, I don't keep them any longer
on the line.” An 'emissions threshold' would make it easier for farmers above a
In addition, certain threshold values are no longer possible
expand their business.
Legally complicated
 But the plans turned out to be "legally complicated," Demir now says. The forties
The largest emitters do not have to stop if they manage to reduce their emissions before 2030
halved, the Flemish government writes in the agreement. “But this will be very difficult
they become,” Demir emphasizes.
For example, farmers can apply innovative techniques in their stables
reduce emissions, but it must be proven that the devices do what they are supposed to do
promise. A scientific committee will look at this per farm,
she says. Scientific studies have been carried out in the Netherlands in recent years
demonstrated that innovative solutions often yield less return than
promised.
Another option is for these farmers to keep fewer animals, says Demir. It
The number of animals will then have to be significantly reduced. “That won't be interesting
business model is more for them.”
The Dutch government first looked at it with a smile
Flemish approach
The emissions threshold is off the table, which also turned out to be legally untenable. Farmers
may expand provided they can demonstrate this in advance through an environmental study
 nature is not additionally burdened. Here too, each farm is separate
being watched.
The nitrogen problem in Flanders is reminiscent of the problems in
Netherlands and started the same way. A Belgian environmental club lasted two years
ago in an appeal against the expansion of a poultry farmer in the village
Kortesem. He wanted to keep double the number of chickens, about 180,000, but was unable to do so
prove that this expansion would not place an additional burden on nearby nature reserves.
Let it slide
The judge also used the lawsuit to let Flanders know that
it had neglected the nitrogen approach for years and had done nothing to improve the situation
reduce emissions. What turned out to be: more than three-quarters of the vulnerable
nature reserves - 61 in total - deposited more nitrogen than according to European standards
rules are allowed. The area of Flanders is one third of that of the Netherlands
land area, about 40 million farm animals are kept there.
The nitrogen crisis required a tough approach, which did not spare farmers
conjure. Has this approach failed? “Not at all,” says Demir. At the deadline
of 2030 has not been tampered with, she says. Half of the nature reserves must then be closed
meet European standards. And the shrinkage of the pig herd, 30 percent
fewer pigs in 2030 also remains the case. Just like the ban on driving out
of manure.
 Also read
In addition to the 2,500 already known farmers
possibly thousands of other agricultural companies
Also illegally emitting nitrogen
From 2030, the Flemish government wants to expand its nitrogen approach to one
broader approach that goes beyond reducing nitrogen emissions and also
pays attention to drought and water problems.
“We are a lot further along than the Netherlands,” says Demir. She hopes that the
nitrogen approach in Flanders starts in 2024. “The Netherlands is in the right position in terms of its nitrogen approach
nowhere at all.”
A version of this article also appeared in the newspaper of November 15, 2023.
Share 9% Email the editor
AGRICULTURE AND LIVESTOCK
The company 'Gebroeders C. and K. Kievit' is no more.
Oh well, what does it matter?
12 hours ago
 Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Hire an Editorial Team Mediahuis NRC
Working with a subscription Opinion editor NRC Carrière
Copyright Login The ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create account Colophon NRC Readers Fund
Terms of delivery Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My reading list Customer service
Our app My subscriptions Family messages
Archive Service & delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
