= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
BACKGROUND
Biodiversity as a commodity: will that happen?
help nature?
Biodiversity credits After CO credits, there is a new promise: biodiversity credits.
Start-ups, banks and governments are working on a trading system to protect nature
to rescue. But there are pitfalls.
Wouter van Noort January 12, 2024 Reading time 6 minutes
Listening Reading list A
 very surprising that nature is being sacrificed. A living, healthy nature
is not easily measurable. There is no such thing as a 'product' in the short term
you cannot invest in it.
But perhaps that is about to change.
 In any case, that is what Arnout Asjes, co-founder of Land Life, hopes for
company, with 75 employees, restores landscapes. It includes, among other things:
Spain, Australia and the US have degraded land, often desiccated or eroded,
by planting trees and improving the soil. But just look there
to earn money with it.
One way to finance this now is through carbon credits, companies and citizens
can buy them from a credit provider, who measures whether a
business activity GO, saves: for example planting trees. Sun
provider issues a credit so that people can invest in measurable assets
CO storage in the future. That seems like a solution for companies like Land Lite.
Because it plants trees that absorb CO, it can claim money from it
the providers of credits.
But actually carbon credits are not very suitable for what Land Life wants,
says Asjes, “The work we do, especially in dry areas, is good for the environment
biodiversity but produces relatively little CO2 storage in the short term.” By
There is naturally little rainfall in the areas where Land Life is active
This often concerns land on which vegetation grows slowly. “If we quickly remove a lot of CO
If we want storage, we would have to work in Brazil or Congo,” he says. In
Those tropical countries greet trees much harder, and therefore things go much faster
with CO storage. And it is therefore possible to earn much more with CO credits.
But yes, this is also the case in countries where nature recovery is slower than in the tropics
need for better ecosystems. Land Life's struggle to get enough
 money for obviously important work is indicative of more companies
in ecosystem and landscape restoration, Also in countries where trees grow slowly
To grow, nature must be restored, but carbon credits are not suitable for that
always good for. This makes it difficult to finance nature restoration,
That is why Asjes looks hopefully at a striking idea that has been emerging recently
is: biodiversity credits, also called nature credits, if you invest in
CO capture can be included in a financial instrument, why then biodiversity?
not too? “That could create a better revenue model for nature restoration,
something for which there is a huge need”
The idea is at least twenty years old, but due to technological developments and...
Growing political pressure for nature restoration is suddenly in the spotlight
interest. All kinds of start-ups, banks and governments are reporting that they are working on it
hold. Dozens of companies already offer nature credits. France and it
United Kingdom are making plans together to create a market for it
biodiversity credits. Also at the European Union and the United Nations
committees are working on it.
Could these types of financial instruments help protect nature?
to rescue? The promises are great, but experts point out major pitfalls. Four
to ask.
1. How do biodiversity credits work?
 The credits are financial instruments that companies, individuals or
enable governments to invest in projects that make a measurable contribution
biodiversity, Such a credit is a way to record where it is
ecosystem restoration has taken place, who did it and what the effect is
is.
An independent credit provider checks and measures the effect
nature restoration, issues the credit, and shares the income from the credits with the
party carrying out the repair. It's a way to prevent that
financiers, the nature restorers have to rely on their blue eyes: it
makes nature restoration quantifiable and tradable.
A biodiversity credit is therefore an instrument to demonstrably invest in
nature restoration. And it can also be a way to invest in the upfront
yields from healthier ecosystems. Healthier ecosystems are possible
for example, contributing to higher agricultural yields, ecotourism, higher
land prices.
Take a company that makes products with fruit, which is therefore dependent in the long term
of healthy soils and enough bees to pollinate fruit trees, such a company
has an interest in a biodiversity credit that contributes to healthy ecosystems.
Or take a seller of flower vases. He could offer that to his customers
to buy biodiversity credits with the vase to indirectly increase the availability of
to secure wide flowers in the long term. The idea is that these types of credits both
 can be voluntary or made mandatory for certain purchases,
a bit like the CO compensation that now applies to airline tickets, for example.
2. Who are they intended for?
Anyone can buy these credits: states that want to finance nature restoration,
philanthropists, companies and citizens who want to compensate for environmental damage or
want to voluntarily contribute to a healthier nature. You buy them from one
provider of the credits, and they are also tradable, companies can use them as
addition to selling products, etc.
Roland van der Vorst, CEO of Rabo Carbon Bank, a branch of Rabobank
who focuses on more nature-friendly agriculture, mainly sees potential
applications in that sector. “Many agricultural practices have a bad influence
on biodiversity, which not only threatens the quality of life, but also the
agriculture itself” If biodiversity decreases, resulting in fewer insects,
pollination and therefore crop harvest also decreases, for example,
There is already a financial interest in biodiversity, but one is missing
standard way to invest in it. There is a problem, Before
a healthier soil and environment translate into better harvests for years to come
further. Van der Vorst: “If I make my house more sustainable, I immediately benefit financially
benefit: lower energy costs. This is not the case with many agricultural practices'
The challenge he believes biodiversity credits can help with is:
long-term biodiversity gains for the farmer into financial profits
 short-term. This is in the research phase at Rabo, but Van der Vorst
expects that nature credits will “almost certainly” become more serious in the coming years
become an instrument.
Sonny Duijn, biodiversity advisor at ABN Amro, says that his bank
is closely monitoring the possibilities of nature credits, but not yet there
deals in. “For the time being, there are mainly fictional examples of how they work in concrete terms
can work.
3. What are pitfalls?
According to both Van der Vorst and Duijn, there is a lack of a clear standard
for nature credits is now the biggest problem. To good international
To be tradable, such a credit must be an uncontested entity, such as the
dollar or the euro too. What a credit represents must be measurable,
be comparable and somewhat stable. “That is difficult with biodiversity, because
biodiversity in the Achterhoek is very different than in the Amazon,” says Van der
Monarch.
What do you count overall when you measure biodiversity? Fungi, bacteria, worms,
lichens? Or just plant species? Unlike CO, there is very little
consensus on how exactly to measure something as complex as biodiversity. Such
agreement is necessary to keep it verifiable whether a
biodiversity credit actually contributes to biodiversity.
 Also read
'Our farmers leave nature behind as much as possible
do work'
Until now it was almost impossible to measure biodiversity properly, but thanks
Rapid technological developments are changing that, sees Arnout Asjes
from Land Life. His company is working on its own measurement methods, for example through DNA
analysis of soil samples. He is also optimistic about the use of cameras
collect information about, for example, species diversity, and about 'bio-
acoustica': techniques to hear what is teeming in the environment and
crawls. It helps that data analyzes and pattern recognition improve quickly
be done by artificial intelligence.
Rabo Carbon Bank experiments with satellite data to measure biodiversity.
As soon as there are reliable ways to measure biodiversity, parties can
sell credits.
Until then, it is difficult to arrive at a globally usable standard. And that is
necessary if a functioning global credit market is to emerge.
4, Are such credits a solution?
The practice surrounding carbon credits is not reassuring. The trade in CO credits is booming
accompanied by all kinds of perverse incentives that have negative ecological consequences.
In some countries, for example, carbon credits lead to monocultures. Than
 Many of the same types of trees are planted very quickly in order to achieve this as quickly as possible
store as much CO as possible. In the Amazon, for example, countless rows become alien
eucalyptus trees planted by companies financed with money that
is earned from the sale of carbon credits. Eucalyptus trees greetings
quickly and store a lot of carbon dioxide. That makes them attractive
to sell carbon credits. But landscapes full of eucalyptus are bad for this
soil and biodiversity, and the trees burn like matchsticks in forest fires.
CO credits may contribute to CO reduction, but they destroy local energy
ecosystems right,
These perverse incentives, inadequate supervision and cowboy practices have created the
There have been many scandals surrounding carbon credits in recent years, as it turned out
research by The Guardian and other international newspapers last year that 90
percent of Verra Carbon Standard's promised carbon offset, a big one
provider, probably never took place.
According to Philippe Kónig, partner at Houthoff law firm, the mistakes are out of the question
to draw clear lessons for biodiversity credits from carbon credits. He
is engaged in a personal capacity to lobby for the development of
biodiversity credits. Kónig emphasizes its promises for nature restoration, but
also points out another risk: “For example, it would not be a good idea
only to be used for offsetting” - compensation for damage. Suppose: one
miner destroys an ecosystem and buys it off with biodiversity credits
for ecosystem restoration eiders. König: “If they are used in this way, the
nature has no net gain.”
 The European Commission, among others, is working to overcome these types of problems
Commission on 'robust methodologies' to prevent recurrence of mistakes
prevent carbon credits. This was announced by the country's highest environmental official
EU, Florika Fink-Hooijer, last October.
Many nature organizations also have mixed feelings about this for other reasons
biodiversity credits. By putting a monetary value on something like that
priceless as nature, you reduce ecosystems to commodities again. And
Wasn't that the cause of all the mess? Shouldn't we just get rid of everything?
economic thinking instead of nature within the economic models
to take?
Principled objections or not, ways to trade biodiversity will
according to those involved, it will certainly increase in the coming years. The big question is
according to Roland van der Vorst of the Rabo Carbon Bank or that will happen with
a more or less global system, or whether it is mainly smaller-scale,
more local credit systems will remain due to the large differences between
ecosystems.
Either way, it's high time for better ways to manage biodiversity
can invest, says Arnout Asjes of Land Life: “With the current pace of
we simply won't be able to restore nature.”
A version of this article also appeared in the January 13, 2024 newspaper.
 Share Email the editor
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest one
milk
21 hours ago
Write
 
sign up for the newsletter
Í 'Inside knowledge'
Economics editors take you through the C
discussions they have in the editorial office
 about current developments
My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
Editorial
About us
Media house NRC
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN YW f © MO
