12/5/22, 12:43 PM Remkes' tone is 'nice', but he does not take away the anger and distrust - NRC
N.B. Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
05:11
Interview
Remkes' tone is nice, but he takes the
anger and distrust do not go away
Farmers Farmers were eagerly awaiting Remkes' findings. "We
cannot suddenly start growing corn,” says Alien van Zijtveld.
Ö ArjenSchreuder © 5october2022 Ò Reading time 3 minutes
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/05/remkes-toon-is-fijn-maar-hij-nemen-de-woede-en-het-wantrouwen-niet-weg-a4 144283 1/ 5
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM Remkes' tone is 'nice', but he does not take away the anger and distrust - NRC
Her three children, aged eight, six and two, are housed elsewhere, time for that
farmer Alien van Zijtveld (30), sitting behind a cup of soup at the kitchen table, via the
laptop to hear directly how Johan Remkes thinks things should proceed with the
farmers in the Netherlands. “I don't have great expectations for it,” says Van Zijtveld. Together
With her husband Pieter (31) she owns a dairy farm in Overijsselse
Rouveen, with more than a hundred cows.
Remkes' tone initially goes down well with Van Zijtveld, secretary of Agractie, one
somewhat moderate action group that fights for the interests of the farmers in times of
nitrogen policy. “Fine,” she sighs when Remkes speaks from The Hague about a country
in which there is room for farmers, 'including young farmers'.
But when Remkes has finished his explanation, disappointment prevails. Mainly
about his advice to farmers who live close to European protected nature reserves
to induce 'another way of doing business', to entice people to move or to voluntarily leave
stop and, if that doesn't work, expropriate it. “Stopping is terrible if you are a farmer
not choose yourself. It is a life's work” And a different business operation? “How should
we do that? We are on peat soil here. We grow grass for our cows, we
cannot suddenly start growing corn or something like that”
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/05/remkes-toon-is-fijn-maar-hij-nemen-de-woede-en-het-wantrouwen-niet-weg-a4 144283 2/ 5
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM Remkes' tone is 'nice', but he does not take away the anger and distrust - NRC
Farmer Alien van Zijtveld watches the presentation of the report.
Photo Eric Brinkhorst ta
Large loach
Alien van Zijtveld does not know whether her company will be faced with government measures. The
cows are more than a mile away from Olde Maten and Veerslootslanden,
a Natura 2000 area where, according to the description, mainly unfertilized blue grasslands
are worth protecting, as well as the large loach. “Never heard of it,” he laughs
she. Or her dairy farm is one of the "peak loaders" near nature reserves
According to the government, they emit too much nitrogen, but they don't know either. “When are you one
peak loader? That cannot be determined. Moreover, you can never say that because of the
nitrogen from your company that one piece of nature has become less valuable”
She is satisfied with Remkes' opinion that the critical deposition value, the
limit of what a nature reserve can store in too much nitrogen should not be sacred
be explained and that particular attention must be paid to the state of nature itself,
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/05/remkes-toon-is-fijn-maar-hij-nemen-de-woede-en-het-wantrouwen-niet-weg-a4 144283 3/ 5
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM Remkes' tone is 'nice', but he does not take away the anger and distrust - NRC
Van Zijtveld: “Then it often turns out not to be about nitrogen but about water or soil.” Also
she is satisfied with Remkes' criticism of the government's actions in recent years.
“The problem is not nitrogen, the problem is an unreliable government,” she says.
“Look how many farmers are no longer happy”
She lists a number of measures that make life almost impossible for farmers
made; especially the system of phosphate rights established a few years ago
farmers who had been allowed to increase the number of cows just moments before
causes a lot of misery. “Many farmers are the victims of failed government policy. It
policy is lousy, it flies from left to right. I was recently sitting with my six-year-old daughter
at the wheel of the tractor, She steered too far to the left and then too far back to
right and so she swam across the land. Until I said: find a spot in the distance, one
tree for example, and steer to that tree. In one go she straightened up. It's the same with
government. What is missing is a solid plan with a clear goal for agriculture”
In the Netherlands it is about much more than nitrogen, she is convinced. "What if
The Netherlands will soon have solved this nitrogen problem? Then there are others
problems” with the quality of water, for example, or too much fertilizer. Self has
the Van Zijtveld family took over the company from her parents-in-law earlier this year and
is now expanding. They don't have enough land yet to grow all their manure
to be able to drive cows out.
Buying out peak loaders
Her phone rings, chairman Bart Kemp wants to discuss a response to the plans
from Remkes. It is mixed: he mentions the plans for buying out peak loaders
“fire-dangerous” but he is satisfied that Remkes notes that the government has “major
makes mistakes." After the telephone consultation, Van Zijtveld shows her cows, as well as the
purchasing two milking robots that manually milk the cows three times a day
made redundant. What she is "missing", she says, is a clear government. "We have
our company expanded. Because we want to make money. Our company is heavily funded
and we want to pay off. But will we get the chance to do that? I do not think so. Have it soon
we climbed a big mountain, we are at the top, and then, wham, it comes again
a new measure and you are down. Then you can start again”
A video plays on her phone with a song about a country that is proud of farmers.
Launched Wednesday. “This song is about how you can work together on a beautiful country.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/05/remkes-toon-is-fijn-maar-hij-nemen-de-woede-en-het-wantrouwen-niet-weg-a4 144283 4/ 5
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM Remkes' tone is 'nice', but he does not take away the anger and distrust - NRC
children"
The cows of farmer Alien van Zijtveld
Photo Eric Brinkhorst ta
Also read:
Remkes expects 'legal bumps' when stopping
major nitrogen polluters
Also read:
'Here I have to explain why I don't have the reverse
flag is waving'
A version of this article also appeared in the October 6, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/05/remkes-toon-is-fijn-maar-hij-nemen-de-woede-en-het-wantrouwen-niet-weg-a4 144283 5/ 5
