12/10/22, 10:06 AM Nitrogen reduction means a major redesign of farmland - NRC
Ooo
Nitrogen reduction means
a drastic one
redecoration of it
farmland
Nitrogen The government took the first step in its drastic action on Friday
tackling nitrogen: it is now clear how much emissions must be reduced,
by area and province. But how that should be done remains to be seen
completely open.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/10/stikstofkorting-betekent-een-ingrijpende-herartikelen-van-het-boerenland-a4133152 1/5
 12/10/22, 10:06 AM Nitrogen reduction means a major redesign of farmland - NRC
Tackling nitrogen will lead to a major redesign of agriculture and agriculture
the landscape in the Netherlands. That is the hard message that the cabinet delivered on Friday,
together with the goals to reduce nitrogen in areas and provinces for 2030. Five
questions and answers about the nitrogen approach:
1
Why does the Netherlands have a nitrogen problem?
Nitrogen is in the air around us and is not harmful in itself. But
Nitrogen compounds are harmful to humans and the environment, such as ammonia (nitrogen).
and hydrogen) and nitrogen oxides (nitrogen and oxygen). Ammonia mainly comes from
evaporates manure moisture, nitrogen oxides from traffic and industry emissions.
Since 1990, nitrogen emissions in the Netherlands have more than halved. But the
concentration still seriously affects nature: the soil becomes acidic, plants and...
tree species disappear, the number of insects, birds and animals decreases.
Also read:
How Rutte IV must clean up his own legacies
The government continued to issue permits for, for example, livestock farms or the construction of
roads, in anticipation of future reductions in nitrogen. But in 2019
the Council of State ruled that this was contrary to European nature legislation: the
ruling led to a construction freeze and affected 18,000 projects.
Since then, the government has been following legal 'goat paths' about polluting activities
to allow this, closely followed by environmental action group MOB, which is initiating legal proceedings -
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/10/stikstofkorting-betekent-een-ingrijpende-herartikelen-van-het-boerenland-a4133152 2/5
 12/10/22, 10:06 AM Nitrogen reduction means a major redesign of farmland - NRC
and wins. To restore nature, to issue regular permits, it takes action
cabinet now.
A
What will the government do to reduce nitrogen emissions?
The government is allocating more than 24 billion euros until 2035 to tackle nitrogen
plus the improvement of nature, water and climate. By 2030, three quarters of the in
a total of 162 protected nature reserves (Natura 2000) will no longer deteriorate
nitrogen. On Friday, Minister Christianne van der Wal (Nature and Nitrogen, VVD) and
Minister Henk Staghouwer (Agriculture, Christian Union) a first step: the cabinet
announced the percentage of nitrogen emissions per area in 2030
decreased. In consultation with the provinces, this should be determined by the middle of next year
goals are and how they should be achieved.
3
Why does one area have to reduce emissions more than another
Others?
A logical answer is: one area emits more nitrogen than another
others - especially in regions with many livestock farmers or a lot of industry. At provincial level
rural Limburg stands out, which must reduce nitrogen emissions by 52 percent
to lower. In an agricultural area such as the Gelderse Vallei, emissions must be reduced by 58 percent
valleys; 80 percent in stables and 18 percent in pasture. In quite a few
protected nature reserves must reduce emissions by 95 percent. Government
has taken more things into account in the nitrogen targets. Such as: the state and proximity of
nature, the suitability of the soil and water for agricultural use, and whether
areas are centrally located or not. This makes the task much smaller for remote,
suitable agricultural land in Zeeland, North Holland, Flevoland and Groningen and
Friesland.
4
How should the nitrogen in these regions be reduced?
That's the big question. The government has now only quantified provisional goals. It
It is up to provinces to come up with plans and ultimately achieve the standards. All
sectors must contribute 'proportionately' to the reduction. nitrogen oxide emissions,
that spread widely like a “rural blanket” comes from traffic, agriculture,
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/10/stikstofkorting-betekent-een-ingrijpende-herartikelen-van-het-boerenland-a4133152 3/5
 12/10/22, 10:06 AM Nitrogen reduction means a major redesign of farmland - NRC
aviation and shipping, etc. With ammonia,
that settles in the area is agriculture
responsible for 85 percent. It's clear
so that the approach turns into a dramatic one
will lead to downsizing of farms.
Minister Van der Wal confirmed one on Friday
estimate that the livestock population will decrease by about 30 percent
will shrink. Some of the farmers will
need to make a transition to sustainable,
innovative 'circular agriculture' - if they
can invest and farm profitably.
Another part will be either voluntarily or through expropriation
have to move or stop.
5
Are these drastic measures inevitable?
According to the cabinet, yes. “I think it is inevitable that we make these choices now
make,” Prime Minister Mark Rutte said on Friday. Regardless of the purpose - restoration and conservation
of nature - the Netherlands is in a legal bind. Something has to be done to
comply with European obligations, the targets for nitrogen reduction are legal
laid down and in the coalition agreement. The sustainability of agriculture and industry is
also necessary to achieve a climate-neutral Netherlands in 2050. On the other hand
there is a lot of resistance from agriculture, the construction sector and the right-wing opposition
major questions are raised about its feasibility. Minister Van der Wal parried
all critical press questions on Friday with persistent optimism: “I am convinced that
we can do this together,” she said.
Also read:
Buying out farmers seems inevitable, 'that's how you break it
our sector”
The government's plans are "hitting home hard" among farmers and gardeners, writes
farmers' organization LTO on its website. The plans lead to an “unrealistic demolition of
the countryside", where the responsibility, according to LTO chairman Sjaak van der Tak, "in
the shoes of the provinces'.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/10/stikstofkorting-betekent-een-ingrijpende-herartikelen-van-het-boerenland-a4133152 4/5
 12/10/22, 10:06 AM Nitrogen reduction means a major redesign of farmland - NRC
Farmers' collective Agractie announced on Friday morning, before the announcement
government plans, indicate that a demonstration with tractors will take place in The Hague on June 22. The
group speaks of "premeditated murder" of "farms and the future of
farming families”.
Industry organization Bouwend Nederland speaks of a "bold plan" for "necessary
recovery” of nature in the Netherlands, but also that “there is no room built in for the
licensing that is necessary in the short term for new economic opportunities
developments”.
Environmental organization Greenpeace believes that the government has finally come up with a plan after years of “procrastination”.
presents that nature “hopefully” saves and makes house building possible.
M.m.v. Martin Kuiper
A version of this article also appeared in the June 11, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/10/stikstofkorting-betekent-een-ingrijpende-herartikelen-van-het-boerenland-a4133152 5/5
