12/5/22, 12:44 PM The beer brewery keeps the fields wet with its waste water - NRC
N.B. Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
07:34
Report
The beer brewery loves it
with its waste water
fields wet
It's barely been around for about two months now
When it rains, farmland and natural soil dry out quickly. But there are
many ways to combat drought.
Ö ArjenSchreuder © May 15, 2022 Ò Reading time
 
5 minutes
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/05/15/de-bierbrouwerij-houdt-met-zijn-trouwwater-de-akkers-nat-a4124451 1/6
 12/5/22, 12:44 PM The beer brewery keeps the fields wet with its waste water - NRC
The first leaves of chicory are barely visible to the naked eye, so many of them
The plant is having difficulty growing in the fields of De farm this spring
Krakenburg in Olen, a hamlet northeast of Eindhoven. “We are doing it
think about whether we should irrigate,” says farmer Kees Huijbers. That costs a lot of money. Are
father Lex: “One shower would be enough?”
It hasn't rained on the high sandy soils in eastern Brabant for a long time - just
as in the rest of the country. There is no panic yet, but Dutch water managers are
I am gradually becoming very concerned about the drought, which has been going on for about two months now
persists. The so-called precipitation deficit, the difference between evaporation and precipitation,
increases sharply and amounts to approximately one hundred millimeters. That is a level that once in
occurs every twenty years.
Also read:
It's too dry again. What are we going to do about it?
Farmland and natural soil are drying out at a rapid pace, especially in the higher parts
southern and eastern Netherlands. And it seemed to go so well. After three dry summers
the groundwater level in almost all of the Netherlands has fallen, fortunately until last year
it rained heavily again and the level was back in order at the end of the winter. Untill
The drought started again in March.
Hundreds of ways
There are hundreds of ways to combat the drought and its consequences. One of which is
what father and son Huijbers from Olen have been doing for a few years: they irrigate the crops
their fields with water from the area. In their case, this is treated wastewater
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/05/15/de-bierbrouwerij-houdt-met-zijn-trouwwater-de-akkers-nat-a4124451 2/6
 12/5/22, 12:44 PM The beer brewery keeps the fields wet with its waste water - NRC
beer brewer Bavaria. He normally discharged this a few kilometers further into a stream,
but now in an underground pipe, which then flows to ninety centimeters deep
located pipes in the fields and keeps the soil wet there. Lex Huijbers: “There used to be one
a few people from the brewery and the farming community had a beer and they asked
Together we realized that it was actually very strange that all that water went to sea so quickly
brought. This is how the idea arose to use that water for agriculture”
The entrepreneurs, who not only grow crops but also run a daycare center
care farm and run an inn, receive European subsidies according to a rough estimate
estimate about five hundred cubic meters of water per day, and that provides a
higher and therefore stable groundwater level. Elsewhere on their land, groundwater is even rising
occasionally so strong that it causes nuisance. “I once planted trees in the playground
the daycare center, and those trees just floated away,” says Kees Huijbers.
Also read:
The growing season is still young, but where does the rain go?
He has been able to control the water level via an app on his phone for several weeks now. That the
chicory still looks so thin now, is because the roots need the abundantly available water,
high in the ground, just not yet able to reach it. It can hardly be anything other than that
soon the plants will benefit from what is known in the jargon of water managers
is called “level-controlled drainage”.
During previous dry summers they farmed on their ten hectares of land
successively sugar beets, barley and corn and that went well. They collected nineteen tons
dry matter per hectare of land. Lex Huijbers: “A third more silage maize
normal. We had never achieved that before. While the costs are the same. It is
It is not without reason that we are so enthusiastic about this” And logically, that is becoming more and more so
farmers are interested in the beer brewer's former process water.
Achterhoek and Twente
During the three dry summers of 2018, 2019 and 2020, the Achterhoek and Twente were
hit hardest. Nowhere was it drier than there. Water managers from the east of
The country has not been idle in recent years to combat the consequences of drought in the country
prevent in the future. It no longer takes that much effort for the farmers
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/05/15/de-bierbrouwerij-houdt-met-zijn-trouwwater-de-akkers-nat-a4124451 3/6
 12/5/22, 12:44 PM The beer brewery keeps the fields wet with its waste water - NRC
to cooperate, says Wim Wassink, because the damage caused by drought is
for agriculture is many times greater than the damage caused by flooding. "Earlier
the farmers reasoned that they could throw away their crops in wet weather and that they could be harvested
were able to irrigate during a dry period. But nowadays you often can't
irrigate”
Photo Walter Autumn
Wassink coordinates the freshwater supply in the eastern Netherlands and walks in it
Overijssel village of Enter, in the west of Twente, to the banks of the Regge. The river
flowed straight through the landscape here a few years ago, but now meanders there
idyllic throughout, narrower, and with many shallow bends. That's why it flows
river water slows down towards the Vecht and from there to the IJsselmeer, and remains so
longer in the area - raising the groundwater level by up to several kilometers
either side of the banks increases.
The “deepening and remeandering” of the Regge, to use water jargon again
diving, is one of one hundred and fifty projects carried out over the past six years
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/05/15/de-bierbrouwerij-houdt-met-zijn-trouwwater-de-akkers-nat-a4124451 4/6
 12/5/22, 12:44 PM The beer brewery keeps the fields wet with its waste water - NRC
to cope with the drought in the area. These are sometimes complicated and expensive
interventions, such as with the Regge. What also happened: water from larger ones in more places
waters, such as the Twente Canal. Furthermore, on the farmland and in the
nature, many ditches are closed, so that the rainwater does not fall immediately
flows away. Also, in many cities rainwater no longer disappears into the sewers, but becomes
it infiltrated into the soil.
And which has also helped in the current drought
is that many water board members are monitoring the water levels
waters much higher than the Netherlands
is used to. Rivers, canals and canals are standing
pretty full, and who doesn't know better, would
I think the drought won't be too bad. In
In reality, the waters are temporarily full
an attempt to hold the water for as long as possible
to hold. Wassink: “Ten years ago the
mindset: oops, we have a lot of water, let's
make sure we get rid of it”
That's called flexible water level management. And for now it is possible
that too, because there is still flow this spring
sufficient water from the major rivers
abroad into the Netherlands.
Of course there is a limit to fighting
Father L h Kees Hui
of drought, because if you are not careful, you will keep vein Lex (right) and son Kees Huijbers
. at their irrigation system that their
a lot of water that suddenly comes with rain
. . irrigates fields with purified wastewater
rain falls from the sky, floods
from beer brewer Bavaria.
to threaten. Wassink: “If you see all the waterways Photo Walter Herfst ta
close it, you have solved the drought. But then
this area has become one big swamp. That
don't want you again"
And one more thing: you cannot combat drought in a short time, as you can with flooding
you might be able to do, for example by building a dike or a dam. The approach of
the drought lasts for decades, during which different times occur in different places
measures must be taken.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/05/15/de-bierbrouwerij-houdt-met-zijn-trouwwater-de-akkers-nat-a4124451 5/6
 12/5/22, 12:44 PM The beer brewery keeps the fields wet with its waste water - NRC
Wassink: “I think we reached about 10 in the first six years of our program
percent of the total.” Water managers expect more or less only in 2050
to be ready. But even then: no matter how much you can limit the consequences of drought,
you can't prevent it from raining. So when no more drops fall, you stand like
water manager powerless. Wassink looks around at the banks of the Regge and
says: “If it doesn't rain for a month or more, it will be brown here.”
DRY LAND
In this series, NRC pays attention to ways in which a
changing climate.
1. How do you ensure that the garden can withstand both heavy rain and drought?
2. Farmers and water boards are arming themselves against the drought
3. Can corn be grown that can withstand drought?
4. In Andalusia, a large part of the fruit harvest is in danger of failing due to the extreme drought
B, This dry spring is the same as the record year 1976: what are the consequences?
A version of this article also appeared in the May 16, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/05/15/de-bierbrouwerij-houdt-met-zijn-trouwwater-de-akkers-nat-a4124451 6/6
