= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
NEWS
Emergency order in Apeldoorn due to
possible actions after arrests
farmers' protests
Farmers' protest There are calls on social media for people to go to the farm en masse
police station in Apeldoorn. Two men are stuck there that Monday
were arrested during the farmers' protest on the A50.
Koen Marée February 7, 2024 Reading time 1 minute
Listening d) Reading list A
 es Emergency services closed roads in Apeldoorn on Wednesday evening.
to come to the police station, with the name PRS Sede? arrested manner 9 nap
Photo Luciano de Graaf/ANP
 arrested on Monday evening during the farmer protests on the A50. The emergency order is
commenced at 8:30 PM.
The A50 remained closed all night on Monday, after farmers with about 150 tractors entered the
had driven onto the highway near Beekbergen and had asbestos on fire
stabbed. A 39-year-old man from Klarenbeek and a 35-year-old man from Eerbeek
were arrested by the police. They are suspected of dumping
waste and arson. The Apeldoorn mayor states that “within the
boundaries of the law” there are many opportunities to demonstrate. "To block
of roads, arson and (threats of) disruption of public order
and safety we do not allow.”
With the emergency order, the police can take action against rioters, close roads,
evacuate places and ban gatherings, it can be read. People who
who do not cooperate may be arrested by the police. It's not
known until when the emergency order is in force.
The farmers' demonstrations on the A50 and elsewhere in the country caused this
indignant reactions from politicians and the police. The Public Prosecution Service and the police conducted
an emergency meeting with outgoing Minister of Justice Dilan on Wednesday
Yesilgöz, after which they jointly announced that they would take stricter and faster action
action when demonstrators break the law.
Share 9% Email the editors MZ
 AGRICULTURE AND LIVESTOCK
The company 'Gebroeders C. and K. Kievit' is no more.
Oh well, what does it matter?
11 hours ago
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
15 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
