Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws df} Podcasts [F| Digital newspaper Q v
— COLUMN CHRISTIAAN WEIJTS
Nitrogen D-Day
February 24, 2023 Reading time 1 minute
Listening d) Reading list
[7 Please clean your room at 8:30 PM Advertisement
hour I want everything to be spotless.”
“I'll never be able to do that! At the earliest
it will be 8:35 pm.” “Are you screwed, ain
8:30 PM and not a second later.” "You know what?
Then just look at it in its entirety.” See our here
nitrogen impasse, in short. First it was
a color card that paralyzed everything. Now it is
 a year - 2030 or 2035 - which means CDAers and
VVDers in rural provinces take out their pitchforks
to jab at fellow party members in The Hague, and
coalition partners hold each other proverbial torches
strike.
Why does the government choose 2030? Not because
then visit the nitrogen inspectors from Uranus
come flying, but because such a round number
fits neater into a checked sheet than, say, March 5
2031.
So there's something to circling a nitrogen D-Day
random. Especially if you are the last official one
model calculations. We read in that
that even if we were to have complete livestock farming
close down, 90 percent of the Netherlands is still red
remains on the map - thanks to abroad,
which uses different models.
Curious. So those Uranian inspectors are going
never a tidy room at all
find. And what now? Powerless among us
just crawl away, waiting for it
Armageddon? No. There are all kinds of reasons for this
Invest from €100,000
and receive up to 5 25%
 want less livestock farming and more nature. The fixed interest rate
what matters is that we can generally agree
about that pursuit, daring to go in a direction. That
does not give the optimal result in terms of model,
but an improvement compared to now.
The dot on the horizon belongs like the fly in it
to be a urinal, which should nudge all whiners somewhat in the desired direction, and
not the commitment to a far-peeing competition ("he shouldn't be five millimeters
higher?")
The only times I suffer from writer's block is when I do too much
I've been looking at American storytelling schemes, which suddenly made my message board pop up
is covered in post-its full of plot points.
Block concrete schemes. Better start simply, with a global one
mindset, and adjust your models as you go - dynamic, organic, in
interaction with reality. Even tidying zealot Marie Kondo shines
to have let go of neuroses since she has children and therefore lives through her
model home has started crawling.
Rigid color charts and steel deadlines give our country a policy block. Of
as a clownish low point that the nitrogen regulations now also include the expansion of the
slow down green electricity grid. Because of the minuscule nitrogen emissions from that one
 activities. Bad luck, energy transition. That plot twist is still allowed
not from the sticky notes.
Let us continue to debate for years to come about the exact date on which our country
according to which model must be completely finished. Then we tie a beautiful one
tie a bow around it and we'll live happily ever after.
Christiaan Weijts writes a column here every Friday.
A version of this article also appeared in the February 24, 2023 newspaper.
Share 9% Email the editor
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Hire an Editorial Team Mediahuis NRC
Working with a subscription Opinion editor NRC Carrière
Copyright Login The ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create account Colophon NRC Readers Fund
Terms of delivery Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My reading list Customer service
Our app My subscriptions Family messages
Archive Service & delivery
Advertising Newsletters
 NN W f ©) EH
