Greening farmland? ©”
Whoa, whoa, that just isn't possible
Agroecological pioneers and nature restorers are running into a wall
rules and interests. That slows down the green transition quite a bit. “It's so frustrating
that I almost wonder whether I want to continue with this.'
 1 HE AA
\/
uf
M al
e
ee vene eee ee ee. .
DR 3 . . Ld rn
“ .’ ee honor . ...
pl . e
vene tete
 
re Tee eee dt ded .*
 
a
Ld
/ SP
Animation Mart Veldhuis ta
Ö Wouter van Noort © February 12, 2024 Ô Reading time
 
4 minutes
 Almost a year and a half ago, Johannes Regelink started De Patrijs, an 'agro-ecological
burger farm', on a piece of land near Lochem in Gelderland. On the site of a traditional one
He wants a new kind of dairy farming, financed in part by crowdfunding
building a farm that is better for the soil, biodiversity and the environment. From the ambition:
“In everything we do, we work with nature and let it work for us. We
provide healthy food and at the same time restore the soil, working towards a rich soil
biodiversity, make the landscape even more beautiful and connect people with their food”
Who could be against that, you might think? The need for an agricultural transition is
evident, and the ecological crisis cries out for solutions, and therefore for new pioneers
trying out ways of living and working. However?
Well, there's a problem. Agroecological farms are often more labor intensive. The
For example, Patrijs works with strip cultivation instead of monocultures of one and the same thing
crop, and cows always have to graze on a different piece of land instead of on it each time
the same vast stretch of pasture. This means that more hands are needed in the yard, says
Regelink. “So it is actually necessary to live on the farm with more people than that
with traditional farmers”
And that is not simply allowed by the municipality. One farm belongs to one farm house. The
The municipality of Lochem is sometimes quite willing to look for solutions,
says Regelink, but it has not been possible to make any real progress in the business for over a year.
“Extremely frustrating, and it also stands in the way of the necessary transition”
The story of De Patrijs is not an isolated one, there are green pioneers everywhere in the Netherlands
against a similar wall of rules, complexity, bureaucracy and sometimes
vested farmers' interests that oppose greening and more biodiverse landscapes.
 For example, Arno Feenstra: he bought a piece of farmland in the Frisian Smallingerland
to create a more natural landscape. “I want to connect it with the It Fryske nature reserve
Gea, create more space for water, more types of plants” But he spends up to his
great frustration, now more time spent on hassle with the municipality than on repairing the
nature. “It's bizarre what happens to you. You get stuck in a tangle of rules and have to...
take a long time to get permission”
For example, he is not allowed to simply plant trees as a private individual, even though that is probably the case
would have liked if he had a nursery. He must, before he runs out of nature
restores land, has expensive research carried out or not too much of the road that runs along his land
causes noise. “While It Fryske Gea literally starts on the other side of the road”
He runs into a wall of rigid officials and complex rules. “That's so frustrating
I almost wonder if I want to continue with this”
As much nature reserve as possible
Or take Ruurd Jelle van der Leij, who cultivated a meadow in the Frisian Oldeholtpade during corona.
turned into a nature reserve, and now wants the same with his citizens' initiative Aanpoten.nu
do in many more places. “We want to create as much nature reserve as possible,” he says.
The before and after images of their transformed pastures regularly go viral
social media, he joined talk shows to talk about the difference that their
restoration work for nature and local residents. The work strikes a chord and contributes
the green transition, you would think.
But the red carpet is certainly not rolled out for them either: they are entangled in it
zoning plans, permit applications (including for projects involving more than
must be dug forty centimeters deep), different rules, procedures, waiting times. That
 This means that he can green up much less than desired. “It will be incredibly difficult
made"
It varies from case to case what causes greening to stall: sometimes it is zoning plans
that adapt with difficulty or not at all. Sometimes they are vested interests
neighboring farms, which want to thwart new ways of farming through the
municipality or welfare committee. Sometimes it is completely unfathomable why the
municipality, then the fire brigade, then the welfare committee, the province, and
then neighbors raise objections and obstacles. Municipalities can usually
do not comment on ongoing individual cases.
Conflicting interests
At the same time, it is a real question whether it is a good idea to just give everyone carte blanche
to make drastic changes to landscapes. Sometimes greening ambitions conflict
other common interests, such as protection of cultural-historical heritage, or
with government agricultural strategies: there must be sufficient agricultural land
left for food production.
Reality is complex, so it is not surprising that there are rules. But the red one
thread is that many of these pioneers are so frustrated that they have doubts
realization of their greening ambitions. Van der Leij: “There are already several projects that are not running
continued”
And there is one thing that Regelink, Van der Leij and Feenstra all point out, one thing that
Moreover, it seems exemplary for the stalling of many necessary transitions. Regulation link:
“There is no vision about where we are going with our landscape”
 What does the community see as nature and what does not, what future is there for intensive
agriculture, how to deal with the clashes between cultural history on the one hand and
sustainability on the other hand? And, also not unimportant, biodiversity can become
strengthens? There is no room for that conversation, that is what their contacts with the
community rarely or never, even though that is the core of what they want to achieve.
Instead of offering a listening ear to new ideas about agriculture, nature and...
landscape, municipalities and provinces are often stuck with enforcing extremely complex systems
rules that date from another era is their complaint. “If you really want something different
there is actually no room for that,” says Regelink.
What is missing above all, according to Arno Feenstra, is a basic level of trust in that
these pioneers want to do the right thing. “You don't want a municipality to be so suspicious
to its own citizens that every real experiment is stopped?
In this section, four authors write about the dilemmas that arise from the
major transitions in society and economy due to the necessity of
pioneers and the obstacles that stand in their way.
A version of this article also appeared in the February 13, 2024 newspaper.
