= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
NEWS
European Parliament approves much-discussed
nature restoration act good
Ecosystems The mood, which was tense until the last moment, is one
boost for the Green Deal. However, the law was considerably weakened.
Clara van de Wiel February 27, 2024 Reading time 1 minute
Listening d) Reading list A
 AEN
 The law obliges member states to take the vegetation, which is the oldest primary forest in the Netherlands.
in 2030 on 20 percent of European land and sea areas Photo Walter Herfst/ANP
nature restoration measures are taken. Currently in Europe
81 percent of habitats [an organism's habitat] are in poor condition. In
These must all be restored by 2050.
Boost for 'Green Deal'
The vote is a boost for the 'Green Deal', the ambitious climate and
nature program of the European Union, which has recently come under pressure
to stand. Until the last moment on Tuesday it remained uncertain whether the nature restoration law,
which became part of a fierce political battle last year, would succeed. Also
In the Netherlands, the law caused a stir because, according to critics, it would lead to more
stricter obligations for reducing nitrogen emissions. The Netherlands
abstained from a vote on the law last year.
Also read
'Will the Netherlands be locked down even further?' and six others
questions about the controversial European
nature restoration act
The Christian Democratic faction in particular returned to the European Parliament, wherever they were
the CDA is part of, is strongly against the law. Criticism focused, among other things, on:
the impact that the proposal would have on European agriculture and therefore on
the food supply - although scientists have debunked that argument. Also
 On Tuesday, many Christian Democratic MEPs turned against it
the law, also referring to the recent farmers' protests in
several EU member states.
In recent weeks, these protests have already led to the European Commission
suspended several environmental regulations for farmers. A bill was also introduced
this should lead to a reduction in the use of pesticides
completely taken off the table. It means that from previous attempts also the
agriculture to be included in the Green Deal, there is now little left.
Also read
Farmers get a reprieve, but European ones
agricultural challenge remains
Deterioration ban
Ultimately, sufficient MEPs appeared willing to do so on Tuesday
to support the nature restoration law. To this end, it has already been used on numerous occasions last year
points have been toned down, so that, according to environmental organizations, there is not much more
is left of the law's initial ambitions.
For example, the so-called 'deterioration ban' is a controversial passage against which
The Netherlands also resisted, but this was considerably watered down. Instead of the obligation for
Member States do not want their nature to deteriorate further, they must come here now
 still purely for 'effort'. Also objectives for recovering from
peat areas were considerably toned down.
A version of this article also appeared in the February 28, 2024 newspaper.
Share Email the editor
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest one
milk
21 hours ago
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
 Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
