12/5/22, 12:40 PM Opinion | Looking at the entire chain for CO2 storage? Also with 'sustainable' - NRC
Opinion
N.B. Elements may be missing from this print version.
For CO2 storage to the entire chain
to look? Then also with 'sustainable
Climate Factories that emit CO2 produce more emissions than
only in the factory itself. Indeed, writes Wouter van Dieren, as there is
Many emissions also precede the use of solar cells
or an electric car.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/bij-co2-storing-naar-de-hele-keten-kijk-dan-ook-bij-duurzaam-a4150275 1/2
 12/5/22, 12:40 PM Opinion | Looking at the entire chain for CO2 storage? Also with 'sustainable' - NRC
In his column CO storage slows down the energy transition (26/11) says Martijn Katan
position against the storage of CO» in empty North Sea gas fields. He writes that this
technology has been tried worldwide, but has usually failed. For a bit
further on it appears that most of Air Liquide's CO emissions are possible
are captured and buried underground.
Katan accuses proponents of CO storage "of mainly looking at what is done in the factory."
itself releases CO and ignores the stages that precede it'. Katan sums up the
emissions released during all stages of oil and natural gas extraction, up to and including
transport. No, then the energy transition with nuclear power stations, wind and sun, which he calls “CO-
free sources”! The sun indeed shines for free, the wind always blows. But the
their conversion into electrons is not CO‚-free. This is also energy-intensive
mining, global transportation and conversion of raw materials into products,
infrastructure and in construction. The construction of a nuclear power plant takes fifteen years
the energy consumption during construction, and the enormous amounts of steel and concrete
uses fossil fuels.
Footprints are everywhere. A stark example is the electric car, The disappointments
will become large, because the ecological footprint of the electric
vehicle larger than that of the petrol car. In accordance with the Katan method with CO storage
counts material consumption throughout the chain: mining, steel production, rubber, plastics and...
numerous special materials such as copper, cobalt, neodymium, lithium, nickel, textiles and
worldwide transport from factory to customers. The share of fuel in the
material balance of a car is 15 to 20 percent; if we have the entire infrastructure of it
If road transport is included, this will be 2 percent. Environmental and climate damage has been happening for a long time
on the road when the car is in the showroom.
What do you mean sustainable?
Wouter van Dieren is an environmental expert. He was co-founder of sustainability forum
Springtij and is a member of the Club of Rome.
A version of this article also appeared in the December 3, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/bij-co2-storing-naar-de-hele-keten-kijk-dan-ook-bij-duurzaam-a4150275 2/2
