= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
OPINION
Switch to organic farming - I have some
no regrets
Organic farming Ard van Gaalen has been running one with two fellow farmers for 25 years
organic company. That is harder than 'conventional' farming and less lucrative. However
it pays off.
February 1, 2024 Reading time 3 minutes
Listening d) Reading list
 OIUE . cf ZOUUE u col VVddl DCE « u c dd OIPZE £_ VIOERZE
. IJ . Photo Bram Petraeus
the elderly. They were liberated after the war by the rise of chemicals
 pesticides and fertilizers. They no longer had to weed - always with
that crooked back. Their crops no longer failed.
And now we went back to pre-war methods? They didn't know how then
exhausting those means and methods were for the soil.
For most farmers, sustainability is too expensive, it turned out
week from research by Wageningen University. I
understand that. Only 4.4 percent of farmers work
biological. The rest do it the usual way - like this
we call that. Switching on your own is also not possible.
You are more vulnerable as an organic farmer: you sometimes have one
crop failure, for example. The fight against the weeds is
heavy, and without chemistry you simply cannot do everything
combat fungi and insects.
Ard van Gaalen is
organic farmer in South
Our way of working is also much more labor intensive
Beijerland.
that of conventional farming. We all work together
until late at night, we eat together. Yet we also care about the
turn on holiday to charge the battery. Thirty to thirty work there in the summer
forty migrant workers with us. We now have weed robots running, that's it
trial, that is a hopeful development.
Potatoes, carrots, onions and cows
 We would never have been able to make the switch from conventional to organic on our own
to make. But we merged our three companies in 1999. That was ours
rescue. We now have 300 hectares together. We can go there with our families
still alive. We grow potatoes, carrots, onions, beetroot, parsnips,
peas, celeriac. And we have two hundred cows, from which we make milk
cheese.
Conventional farmers have a higher yield per hectare than we do. Dutch
farmers are insanely efficient - the best in the world. They concentrate on
one or two crops. We have several, we do that to get to the bottom
to bring peace. I don't want to give the impression that organic farmers are better than
common. But I think it's smarter to be on the safe side of ours
ecological limit and develop more sustainable agriculture. So
bring in as little animal feed, fertilizer and minerals from outside Europe as possible.
We now grow our carrots so efficiently that they are almost as cheap
are like non-organic roots
Our biggest customers are Germans. Germans are more aware of green and
local than Dutch. In the Netherlands, consumers first and foremost look at the
price of a product on the shelf. So if there are cheap grapes from Peru, or
green beans from Egypt, then the consumer buys them. I think in this one
 In many cases the actual price is not charged, and we therefore use others
saddled with the consequences for their living environment.
A fruit grower here in the polder still had at least thirty trucks worth of beautiful ones
apples are in his refrigerator. Yet at the same time there were apples out
Argentina in the store. They were cheaper, but of course more burdensome
the climate. That should be banned.
Organic products are often slightly more expensive; not always. We are now growing our carrots
so efficient that they are almost as cheap as non-organic carrots. But they
are available in stores for a higher price. Consumers are not always willing
to pay that higher - and fairer - price.
Many find the move too risky
Organic farming is a wonderful profession. We do not exhaust the soil. We have -
scientifically proven - more insects, flowers and bird species on the
organic farm. We also have less nitrogen emissions. Many common ones
Farmers want this too, they tell us. They only find the step to organic
farming too big, too risky. You will then have to grow many more crops
prevent diseases and pests, require more tools and personnel.
In winter we also have fields with herbs and clovers, which we use again
to feed the cows. The roots of those herbs and clovers are good for the
soil. We return the manure from our cows to the land, and that's how we close
 the mineral cycle again. That makes you happy as a farmer. You won't get rich there
of, but it works.
My children study science & innovation, biology and international politics.
They say: well dad, how you farm is very complex. I don't know if she is
take over the farm.
The future of organic farmers, and the growth of their numbers, are especially important
the supermarkets are important. If they were to purchase organic on a larger scale,
Organic food would also become cheaper. And when it gets cheaper, I want it
more consumers use it. Chicken or egg: when do you start? They would be organic
can also present products much better and more prominently in the store
instead of putting them in a corner somewhere.
The government should also do more. As seat belts became mandatory,
solar panels subsidized and tobacco restricted, so would organic
consumption can be stimulated, for example through VAT benefits
biological products. This way you can ensure that consumers can and will do it
pay. And that it becomes attractive for farmers to switch.
Written by Frederiek Weeda
A version of this article also appeared in the February 2, 2024 newspaper.
Share <6 Email the editor
 NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest one
milk
21 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
