= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
NEWS
A third of subsidy schemes for
agriculture can damage biodiversity
Agricultural support There are 34 subsidy schemes for the agricultural sector
twelve are harmful to nature, according to an analysis commissioned by the
Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality (LNV). They serve, among other things
economies of scale and production growth.
Martin Kuiper, Milo van Bokkum September 5, 2023 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening d) Reading list A
 Twelve subsidy schemes for the Dutch
agriculture may have harmful effects on biodiversity. This shows
commissioned by the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Ygedsel Quality SN Van Ditch in the Hoeksche Waard.
Photo Jeffrey Groeneweg / ANP
 The RVO looked at 34 agricultural schemes - from income support to farmers
to subsidies for innovative stable techniques and grassland conservation. Of each is
the effect assessed on nature and biodiversity, the diversity of plants,
animals and fungi. The service, an agency of LNV and Economic Affairs,
uses four categories: possible positive, protective, neutral and
possibly harmful. Twelve subsidy schemes, together worth more than a billion
euros on an annual basis, fall into the latter category.
The government is actually working against itself with these subsidies. The Rutte IV cabinet
has allocated 24.3 billion euros until 2035 for the 'nitrogen fund'
to make agriculture more sustainable and promote biodiversity.
Also read
Sustainable cultivation earns farmers less money
Scaling up
Most regulations that can be harmful encourage intensification of the
Agriculture. They promote scaling up of farming. That is
bad for biodiversity, because of the number of animals kept and production
then often increase. For example, a lot of income support still goes to farmers - this year
more than 400 million euros - which drives up land prices and lease payments. This
According to the researchers, this leads to an increase in scale.
 Financial support for technical innovation in stables and greenhouses also provides
intensification and thus has a negative impact on nature. Farmers who use this
receive a subsidy, have to co-invest. Because it is not rare
tens of thousands of euros that they have to earn back, this drives production
and intensification further, the researchers said.
A total of 34 agricultural schemes were examined, from
income support to farmers to subsidies for innovative ones
stable techniques and grassland conservation
They also comment on a scheme that aims to prevent grassland
is used for corn cultivation. Large areas of corn land are not good for the
biodiversity, according to the researchers, but the arrangement makes transition more difficult
from grass to a more varied cultivation.
Focused on food security
The researchers note that some regulations, such as those for
income support, dates back to the time when Europe was concerned about
food security. In the decades after the Second World War the focus was on
modernization of agriculture and high food production to alleviate hunger
prevent. Less attention was paid to the consequences for the environment and biodiversity.
 Meanwhile, the researchers write, there are also other priorities: climate,
nature and water quality.
Also read
In addition to the 2,500 already known farmers
possibly thousands of other agricultural companies
Also illegally emitting nitrogen
That the Ministry of Agriculture has only now expanded its subsidies on side effects
screened is striking. The Netherlands has been in a crisis since 2019
nitrogen crisis, after the Council of State ruled that governments too
generously permitted nitrogen emissions. The agricultural sector is responsible for this
a large part of that emission. The Netherlands also signed one in 2011
UN Biodiversity Convention. One purpose of this is subsidy schemes
harmful to biodiversity to be stopped or greened.
Outgoing Minister Van der Wal (Nature and Nitrogen, VVD) has the Second
Chamber sent the RVO investigation and called the conclusions “serious
outcome”. In her letter she writes that the 34 schemes were investigated in more depth
will become.
At the same time, she points out that the research also shows that the negative impact of
a number of schemes have already decreased in recent years, for example by
to reduce benefits if additional animals are kept. Subsidies that
 are harmful to nature and biodiversity must be adapted 'before 2030' or
have been stopped, according to Van der Wal.
A version of this article also appeared in the September 6, 2023 newspaper.
Share Email the editor
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Hire an Editorial Team Mediahuis NRC
Working with a subscription Opinion editor NRC Carrière
Copyright Login The ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create account Colophon NRC Readers Fund
Terms of delivery Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My reading list Customer service
Our app My subscriptions Family messages
Archive Service & delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) E
