= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
NEWS
In addition to the 2,500 already known farmers
potentially bumping into thousands more
agricultural companies also illegally use nitrogen
out 
Nature permits Possibly thousands of farms have no requirement
environmental permit applied for. Legalization will be difficult.
Martin Kuiper, Milo van Bokkum August 29, 2023 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening d) Reading list A
 wp S
Ke
thousands - agricultural companies without such a nature permitteoweffkerGionndatg/ANP/Hollandse Hoogte
 For the 2,500 farmers who previously had permission for their nitrogen emissions
The government is looking for information based on the Nitrogen Approach Program (the PAS detectors).
a solution. Because the Council of State determined in 2019 that the PAS ten
wrongly anticipated future nitrogen reduction, the emissions from the
farmers involved are in fact illegal.
Also read
The government will leave 259 farms without
permit doesn't help anyway
It now appears that another large group of farms do not have a permit. She
were already active before new European legislation forced them to do so in February 2009
application for an environmental permit. Many have not done that, sometimes on
advice from the province. This group is known to governments as 'interims'.
Provinces and central government are pointing to each other for a solution.
Wide margin
The existence of 'temporary workers' is known in the agricultural world and in the
politics, but has received little attention so far. On the size of
the group no one has a clear view, because a central national
licensing system is missing. The Northern Audit Office estimated it in 2014
number in Drenthe alone at more than a thousand companies, and in Friesland at 250 to
400. The province of Drenthe is checking whether those figures are "still up to date", says one
 spokesman. Friesland says it is possible that "a number" of farmers
now has the correct permit.
Environmental and health institute RIVM estimates that the interim workers are responsible
are responsible for much more nitrogen precipitation than the PAS detectors
an extremely wide margin. In the extreme case, a fifth of the precipitation can be consumed
vulnerable nature come from interim workers.
Just as with the PAS reporters, the government is looking for one for the interim workers
possibility to reduce their nitrogen emissions by issuing a permit
legatize. With the strict European conditions for nitrogen emissions
vulnerable nature is very complicated.
The impression has been given several times that the interim workers would provide national assistance
to get. State Secretary Sharon Dijksma (Economic Affairs, PvdA) wrote the
House of Representatives in 2014 that the government had to help the group "given the national
character” of the problem, rather than “each province dealing with it individually
does", also former minister Johan Remkes (VVD), who resigned at the request of the
The Rutte IV cabinet looked at the nitrogen problem and recommended last year that the
national government must help these farmers legalize,
Responsibility
According to the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality (LNV), the
responsibility for interim workers at the provinces. The Interprovincial
 Consultation (IPO) believes that the government should find a solution "in principle". The
the provincial representative also points to the farmers involved.
They must "provide the necessary nitrogen space themselves." Drenthe also states this
if the province discovers a farm without a nature permit, the company
which must itself apply for 'cessation' of business activity,
According to the ministry, responsibility lies with the
provinces. They point to the government and to the farmers themselves
Legalizing PAS detectors is an extremely difficult issue in the nitrogen crisis.
This requires the nitrogen space of farmers who stop their business.
The government can then divide that space. That has hardly worked so far, because but
few farmers close their farms. Legalization still seems to be among the interim workers
more difficult, because according to the RIVM they probably precipitate more nitrogen
on vulnerable nature and therefore require more nitrogen space.
The agricultural sector is counting on the government to solve the problems.
Farmers' interest group LTO sees PAS reporters and interim workers as victims
of an unreliable government. During the consultation on the Agriculture Agreement
last year, agricultural organizations insisted on help from the government, it appears
discussion notes from LNV.
 A version of this article also appeared in the August 30, 2023 newspaper.
Email the editor M
Share 9
My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f © MO
