= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
NEWS
Nitrogen emissions must go further
lower than expected, say Wageningen
researchers
Nature The current nitrogen standards are based on research from 2011 and are
outdated according to new research from Wageningen University. Some
nature reserves are less able to withstand nitrogen than expected.
Flóri Hofman August 31, 2023 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening d) Reading list A
 conclude researchers from Wageningen University SREGEST |
 
A
Photo Eric Brinkhorst
 Thursday. The study was commissioned by the (now outgoing)
Minister for Nature and Nitrogen Christianne van der Wal (VVD).
The current nitrogen standards are based on research from 2011 and are according to:
the researchers discovered. “Deposition must be reduced further than it has been so far
was hired to achieve the goals,” says the person involved in the research
ecologist Wieger Wamelink in a statement. “But for now it is the current one
exceedance is still so high in many places that we must first see whether we can reduce the
can reduce current deposition by half. That's quite a task,
but if that succeeds, it will lead to a major improvement for nature.”
Outgoing Minister Van der Wal writes in a press release that she is investigating
"worrying news for nature." “The need to reduce nitrogen
reduction was already high, due to the new scientific insights our
The task has unfortunately become greater." She wants to leave the RIVM in the near future
examine what effect the 'current efforts' are having and what more is needed to achieve this
to protect nature. Van der expects that research will be completed in October
Wals ministry through a spokesperson.
Also read
In addition to the 2,500 already known farmers
possibly thousands of other agricultural companies
Also illegally emitting nitrogen
United Nations
 The WUR researchers translated a report published last year
vulnerable nature throughout Europe to the specific Dutch situation. A
research group led by the United Nations then concluded that
some nature types are more vulnerable to nitrogen emissions than during the
previous European nature survey, conducted in 2011, was thought. For this
To adequately protect vulnerable nature, the standards had to be stricter,
researchers concluded.
It was not exactly clear what this would mean for Dutch standards.
WUR research now shows that some Dutch nature
Nitrogen resistance is worse than expected, which means that nitrogen standards will be lowered
must. On average, emissions must be reduced by 1.3 kilograms per hectare per year
down, to a total emission of 17.7 kilograms. This is about one
average for the whole of the Netherlands: in vulnerable nature reserves the standard will still
must be stricter, while the benchmark for other regions can remain unchanged
to stay.
Critical deposition value
The researchers distinguish 84 types of nature in the Netherlands, 67 of which are
sensitive to nitrogen. To measure how much nitrogen is allowed to precipitate on a
nature reserve, politicians and scientists use the so-called critical approach
deposition value (KDW). Each nature type has its own KDW. It is based
determined and determined by tests in the field, in the lab and with models
 how much nitrogen is allowed to settle before permanent damage occurs. Descends
If too much nitrogen is deposited, characteristic plant species may disappear
are for an area.
In addition to the 84 Dutch nature types that have a KDW, there are another 14
habitats of plant species in Europe with such a nitrogen standard. For 64 of the
The KDW remains the same for 98 nature types, the standard becomes stricter for 32 and for 2
actually smoother. “Nitrogen that settles in a nature reserve remains in the environment for years
present in the soil and in plants and builds up here. At the same time the
soil continues to grow,” says ecologist Wamelink. “The longer the
[research] measurements are ongoing, the clearer it becomes what the negative consequences are
of too much nitrogen on nature. As a result, the KDW is also becoming increasingly important
more accurate and often lower.”
Also read
Not every farmer expected a calculation himself
to know whether they are peak loads
A version of this article also appeared in the September 1, 2023 newspaper.
Share <6 Email the editor
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
