mm This is an article from the NRC archive ®
N.B. Elements may be missing from this print version.
TRAFFIC AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Corn more lucrative as energy
then as food
SUSTAINABILITY BIOGAS WITTENDORP KLAZIENAVEEN ALMELO
Alex Wittendorp, who had to stop due to his health
ecological farming, has started a company that generates electricity from
biogas. “It still hurts that I had to leave the farm.”
Ö HeleendeGraaf © 18april2003 Ò Reading time
 
2 minutes
In fact, Alex Wittendorp would not have wanted to be in his current workplace at all. Preferably
he would be working on the farm near Klazienaveen, farming, with his
dairy goats and sheep. Instead, he sits, neatly dressed, in an office building
located on a windy parking lot in Almelo, right next to the football club stadium
Heracles.
 Wittendorp may no longer be a farmer, but he is still an entrepreneur. The beginning of this year is
latest project started: the sustainable energy company Greenpower.nu; an energy company
wants to produce and stimulate sustainable energy through biogas.
Under the motto 'sustainable living is: sustainable thinking and sustainable action'
Wittendorp officially started Greenpower.nu at the beginning of this year. With the company wants
the 41-year-old entrepreneur sells sustainable electricity to companies and households. There are,
Since the market for green energy was opened in mid-2001, many companies have emerged
deal with this, but Wittendorp goes a step further and sells energy that is
generated using biogas. Biogas is released from biomass (for example silage maize or
corn) that is stored in a closed silo. The gas is then passed through a
cogeneration plant converted into electricity. “I had always been interested in biomass and had
already a small company that carried out feasibility studies for farmers who were thinking about doing something
do with biogas," says Wittendorp. "It is already more lucrative for farmers to grow corn
grow for energy generation, then for food,"
Wittendorp knows everything about farmers. He had a farm near Drenthe for fourteen years
Klazienaveen, until he became ill on October 1, 1996. “I developed a condition of the
respiratory tract. I had to cough continuously because my airways became hyperactive, it was
so bad that I could no longer drive. After a while it turned out that I was allergic to animals
", says Wittendorp, who at that time not only had cattle and sheep, but
was also experimenting with dairy goats.
The allergy was untreatable and his twelve employees had no choice
to send him home and sell the farm, a decision that Wittendorp still retains
is bothering you. “I consciously became a farmer, partly because it is a healthy life. My father
was a farmer and he was never sick” Even though he has exchanged the stable for an office, he has been forgotten
the farm and the animals are not. “It still hurts every day.”
 Wittendorp remains involved in his old profession through its energy activities. He
invested 300,000 euros in setting up the company that he runs together with an employee
and for which he has so far recruited twenty customers. He tries to win them through the
website and will soon begin national advertising. He sees farmers not only as customers,
but especially as suppliers, because building biogas plants is what Wittendorp does
has in mind for his company. “Consumers who buy electricity from Greenpower can
receive an extra discount if they buy a share in a biogas project, which makes it possible
further stimulated and people are involved in sustainable energy,"
He funnels almost all the money he earns from electricity supplies into setting up
the power stations, an activity that he has transferred to another company: Biogas
International, which already has a number of projects underway. “I don't have to grow up so big
Greenpower, only large enough to carry out biogas projects," says
Wittendorp who absolutely does not see himself as an idealist who thinks he can conquer the world
improve. “I would like people to be aware of sustainable energy, and to be a conscious customer
becomes with me. Not because there is a gift attached to it, a means to which others
energy companies lure customers.”
Wittendorp hopes that his company will mainly attract farmers for their activities in the area
to expand power generation, Farmers have had wind turbines on their farms for years
and can now set up biogas plants to provide electricity to households
provided, with the great advantage that the light continues to burn even when there is no wind. "It
It hurts me that people think that farmers are no longer necessary for growing
food, I hope that knowing that the farmer helps to generate energy will improve the image
of the sector is improving again.
This is the sixth part about starting entrepreneurs. The first episode was released on 8
March.
