Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws df} Podcasts [F| Digital newspaper Q v
COLUMN CHRISTIAAN WEIJTS
Dust bubble
July 19, 2019 Reading time 1 minute
Reading list Jl
eater 24
Ad i
TT apparently Louis Napoleon still has them haha
has seen these tall oaks and beech trees
_| at Amelisweerd. Do you think the whoosh of the
Shall we
A27 away, then it might still be here as it was around 1808. A bit nicer
Country houses, meadows and orchards, mirrored
in the Kromme Rijn. with that barrel
In the battle between asphalt and nature, these trees are the
iconic frontline soldiers, who have been fighting since 1971
 their survival. This week they won one
important blow: the Council of State ruled that
hundreds of them do not have to give way to the
widening the highway.
I speak to Jos on the terrace of the tea house
Kloppenborg, from the Friends of Amelisweerd. If
As a student he was already involved in the very first resistance,
and later in the actions in 1978 and 1982. Hundreds
Invest from €100,000 and up
receive up to 5.25% fixed interest
activists then occupied the forest, in the wake of the pe
national squatter riots, with tree houses and \
barricades.
“These weren't just some tree huggers against Rijkswaterstaat in one
juridical procedure. In September '82 it was like war.” He talks about it as
a veteran about the resistance. “On Thursday afternoon we received a signal from the
cook at the Kromhout barracks. He had been given the assignment that evening before
to cook a thousand men. Then we knew what time it was.” The eviction took place
roughly. Summary proceedings were not even awaited.
“They knocked everything over with three bulldozers.” The last tree was just
cut down when the judge ruled: they had to remain standing.
Now, thirty-seven years later, Kloppenborg is luckier. Thanks to the Council
of State and the European Court, which put an end to the Program Approach
Nitrogen (PAS). That was such a truly Dutch find: polluting industry and
 agriculture could easily circumvent the rules, as long as they promised
to compensate for natural damage later.
For years, the ecological POF has been built and farmed in this way. Now the
supreme judges who leak nitrogen bubble. The reflexes are also really Dutch.
The construction industry in the Netherlands is begging for an 'emergency law'. And there will be, of course, one
Commission. Former minister Johan Remkes (VVD) is the scout for new ones
legal goat paths.
New exceptions! Otherwise, “our country is locked down,” as ministers, Cora van
Nieuwenhuizen (VVD) first, please mention it. “It is actually an opening,” he says
Kloppenborg. “You can create new solutions for mobility and transport
that take into account the entire ecosystem of the region.”
The action group 'Amelisweerd not asphalted' recently issued a
tree climbing workshop for potential new occupiers. Maybe that will come across
useful again for a few years. Although the nitrogen verdict is now really forcing the government to do so
cleaner construction and less growth. “If the minister is sensible, she will start already
to a tactical retreat.”
Christiaan Weijts writes a column here every Friday.
A version of this article also appeared in NRC Handelsblad on July 19, 2019.
Share Email the editor
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
