= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
NEWS
Brussels is scrapping even more environmental regulations
new guidance for farmers
European Commission The Commission wants, among other things, administrative burdens for:
reduce farmers. It is a response to the farmers' protests. She sets for the first time
also leave the door ajar for more flexible manure rules.
Clara van de Wiel February 22, 2024 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening Reading list A
  
suggest that the Gearsnissiehaven should be closed in both directions.
Ile At,
 
there
vk N
 
Photo Merlin Daleman
 
 arise from the nitrate directive, which, among other things, leads to farmers in
The Netherlands may spread less manure.
The proposals presented on Thursday are a response to the farmers' protests
that broke out in several EU Member States in recent months. Rather this one
month, the Commission already scrapped a biodiversity rule that obliges farmers
to leave land fallow and she passed a bill about halving it
pesticide use completely.
Now Brussels is proposing, among other things, rules regarding the arrest of
to adapt sufficient permanent grassland. She also wants to look at a rule that
obliges farmers to cover their soil in certain periods. In addition, the
Commission to reduce the number of checks on farms by half and states
them for the definition of 'force majeure', which farmers can invoke if they are in
exceptional circumstances cannot comply with certain rules
stretch.
Also read
Farmers get a reprieve, but European ones
agricultural challenge remains
More measures are likely to follow in the near future: the next one
weeks, the Commission wants to ask farmers directly via an online platform
which measures they suffer most.
 Brussels also wants to explicitly ask about burdens arising from the
so-called nitrate directive, which is intended to prevent water from becoming excessively polluted.
The enforcement of that rule was recently introduced in the Netherlands at the insistence of Brussels
has been tightened, which means that farmers have been allowed to use less manure since this year
drive out.
Letter from Mark Rutte
Now the Commission appears to be opening the door for one for the first time
possibly more flexible attitude regarding the manure rules. Prime Minister Mark asked in a letter
Rutte (VVD) Commission Chairman Ursula von der Leyen explicitly last week
to do something about the nitrate rules. Farmers will have until March to address their grievances
to share the manure rules with Brussels.
Relaxation of the manure rule would not be unique: it has been relaxed over the past twenty years
The Netherlands enjoyed an exceptional position on the European rule several times,
This exception was withdrawn by Brussels at the end of 2022, causing great unrest
among Dutch farmers.
“We are reducing the administrative burden for our farmers to help them...
guarantee food security for European citizens,” said Von der Leyen
in a statement on Thursday. The relaxations cannot be seen separately from the
approaching European Parliament elections in early June. Protesting
farmers are an electoral risk for politicians. Also in France and, among others
In Belgium, politicians recently announced compensation to farmers.
 The proposals now presented will be discussed for the first time on Monday
during a meeting of agricultural ministers in Brussels. It is expected that
There is broad support for the relaxations and that Member States will even inform the Commission
encourage us to go a little further in making the rules more flexible.
A version of this article also appeared in the February 23, 2024 newspaper.
Share <6 Email the editor
EUROPEAN UNION xUnfollow @
Online bank Revolut wants the traditional banks
challenge - but is that ambition realistic?
9 hours ago
Sebastian Kurz and his shadowy Russians
10 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
