= Menu nrc) WD Mijnnieuws f} Podcasts [Sj Digitalekrant Q
REPORTING
Belgian blockades also attract Dutch farmers
to Hazeldonk: beer, sandwiches and burning
car tires
Border blockade Dutch farmers joined the Belgian blockades with their tractors on Friday
at the border. “Industry is allowed to emit much more nitrogen than farmers. That is not true"
Arjen Schreuder February 2, 2024 Reading time 3 minutes
Listening to CD) Reading list U
 Belgian measures
Parliament, explains action leader Jelle Pauwels, adopted a "nitrogen decree" last week
that is “based on incorrect and deliberately fraudulent figures” and farming “virtually impossible”
 to expand their business. Pauwels (39) lives in the Flemish village of Vlimmeren and runs the business
a contracting company. Pauwels: “Calculation models are used of which it is known that 70
percent deviation.”
Photo Merlin Daleman
farmers have to leave there.”
 The action to block the border in three places at the same time is well coordinated, he says,
by the Flemish branch of the Dutch action group Farmers Defense Force (FDF), of which he
is vice-chairman. Around midnight, he said, five hundred Flemish tractors were there
the A16, with a thousand participating activists. People want to stay as long as possible.
Farmers falling asleep
The Flemish farmers enjoy plenty of sympathy. Like from Jan Donckers (68) from the Vlaamse Meer, just now
across the border. He climbed on his bike after being on a narrow road early this morning
lives, saw many evasive trucks driving. Donckers: “The industry could use a lot more nitrogen
emit than the farmers. That is not true. The port of Antwerp is everything for Flanders
farmers just have to sweat out the pain. That's wrong. There will have to be fewer emissions, but
not like this.”
The leader of FDF in the Netherlands, Mark van den Oever, made his appearance a little further on Friday,
at the blockade of the A67 highway in East Brabant. On the phone he tells us that the farmers' actions are in progress
abroad have a “motivating” effect on the Dutch. “Many farmers are a bit asleep here
We have struggled, but we are going to take more action again.” Especially against measures taken by the current government
despite his caretaker status, he still believes. “They cost 50,000 euros for a farm
costs a year.” There are also plans to travel to Brussels with many farmers from different countries
steaming, on June 4, two days before the European elections. “We are going to make ourselves heard there.”
Also read
During the farmers' protest in Arnhem, the farmers are mainly concerned
to signal
A version of this article also appeared in the February 3, 2024 newspaper.
Share «6 Email the editor
BELGIUM
Grim atmosphere at farmers' protests in Brussels
)February 6, 202
 Motorist in Ghent kills two cyclists
February 25, 2024
NRC Websites
My NRC
About NRC
Contact
nrc)
Media house NRC
Subscribe
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
create an account
The ombudsman
Digital newspaper
NRC Readers Fund
Privacy
Colophon
Terms of delivery
My reading list
AdSales
My subscriptions
Customer service
NRC Code
Family messages
Service & delivery
Our app
Newsletters
Archive
To advertise
N.Y
f © DH
