12/5/22, 12:40 PM Column | CO2 storage slows down the energy transition - NRC
Opinion
N.B. Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
05:44
CO2 storage slows down the
energy transition
Column The storage of CO3 underground is a stopgap measure, according to the opinion
Martijn Katan.
© November 24, 2022 Ò Reading time 3 minutes
he Rotterdam industry wants to be expelled
store CO underground. Over there
some nitrogen is released; therefore
the Council of State blocks this plan. Will it be
climate here is a victim of the nitrogen rules?
CO emissions lead to global warming.
The Port of Rotterdam Authority therefore wants a share
of the CO released from refineries and
capture factories and store them underground; than
those factories would no longer heat up
cause. A recent ruling by the Council
of State makes the construction of the necessary
installations impossible. That statement was provoked by environmentalists. Why
Would environmentalists want to block the reduction of CO emissions?
The CO} would be supplied by four Rotterdam companies, including Shell and
Exxon. The Port of Rotterdam Authority wants to transport that CO2 via a pipeline to
an oil rig in the North Sea and into empty gas fields under the seabed. At the
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/24/co2-slag-vertraagt-de-energietransitie-2-a4149159
1/3
 12/5/22, 12:40 PM Column | CO2 storage slows down the energy transition - NRC
However, nitrogen is emitted during the construction of that pipeline and associated installations.
The advantage of less CO is therefore offset by the disadvantage of temporarily more
nitrogen emissions. Johan Vollenbroek and his action group Mobilization for the Environment
have filed a complaint about this and this has been granted by the Council of State.
As a result, the construction of the pipeline has come to a standstill. How bad is that?
More difficult than expected
Attempts have been made in a number of places worldwide to reduce CO emitted from factory chimneys
comes to isolate and store. That usually failed. Technically it turned out to be much more difficult
than expected and costs spiraled out of control. Even if the Rotterdammers succeed
Where so many others have failed, the problem remains that proponents of CO2 storage mainly face
look at what CO is released in the factory itself and the stages that precede it
to ignore. Take a power plant for example. Before the coal or gas where
When the power station is running, a lot of greenhouse gases have already been released into the combustion boilers.
The CO2 released in the power plant itself can largely be captured.
Not complete, 10 to 15 percent still escapes from the chimney and the installations
that capture the CO2 also use fuel and therefore emit extra CO2.
But all in all, capture and storage seems to lead to a significant reduction
greenhouse gas production at the factory. However, the story changes when we consider the
involve previous steps.
The natural gas must first be pumped and transported. Added to that
greenhouse gas release, partly due to leaking natural gas, which is eighty times as strong
greenhouse gas is like CO. The capture and storage of CO in the power plant reduces
therefore only limits the total greenhouse gas emissions, calculated from it
pumping natural gas from the ground to burning it
power production.
A significant emission
This concerns Shell and Exxon; I have assumed that their CO comes from factories that...
comparable to power stations. CO storage provides these types of factories
little. The two other participating industries, Air Liquide and Air Products,
produce hydrogen from natural gas. This releases a relatively large amount of CO. Most of that
can be captured and put underground, but the rest goes into the air. Natural gas
itself is a much more powerful greenhouse gas than CO» and when pumping and transporting it
leaks a few percent into the air. If you cover the entire process from gas field to...
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/24/co2-slag-vertraagt-de-energietransitie-2-a4.149159 2/3
 12/5/22, 12:40 PM Column | CO2 storage slows down the energy transition - NRC
hydrogen plant therefore leads to production of hydrogen from natural gas despite the
CO2 storage still results in significant greenhouse gas emissions.
The United Nations climate experts
find underground CO storage indispensable
limit global warming. That seems | Jl
however, I am more motivated by despair about the
unwillingness of rulers and voters to really do something”
do about the climate, then by a realistic one
estimate of what that CO storage can do. It TALKS WITH NRC
is an unproven, expensive technique and can be done at the bottom of this article
a stopgap measure that yields too little. The subsidy that subscribers respond to. Here you can read
it is better to respond to something else on NRC.nl.
are used. The only thing that really works is to
to leave coal, oil and gas in the ground and our
to obtain energy from CO‚-free sources: nuclear power stations, wind and sun.
I don't think the current Rotterdam industry will do that. Would in fifty years
'Shell' and 'Exxon' are names of the past, from companies that couldn't pivot
towards a fossil-free world? Just like roll film producers such as Kodak and
Agfa, who were made redundant by the smartphone? From internal emails from Shell and
In any case, BP appears to see CO storage primarily as a way to stay in business
on oil and gas, instead of making a difficult and expensive transition to CO‚-free
energy sources.
CO storage slows down the transition to CO-free energy. Environmentalists have that
like Vollenbroek well. The verdict they obtained from the Council of State is reduced
so not only does it reduce nitrogen emissions, but it is also better for the climate in the long run.
Martijn Katan is a biochemist and emeritus professor of nutrition at the Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam. For figures, sources and interests see mkatan.nl.
A version of this article also appeared in the newspaper of November 26, 2022
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/24/co2-slag-vertraagt-de-energietransitie-2-a4.149159 3/3
