= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
BACKGROUND
How feasible is a trading system for
nitrogen ?
Nitrogen Converts the nitrogen emissions from (farm) companies into rights that are traded
can be done, just as is happening now with CO, said top official Sandor Gaastra
recently for. But is that idea feasible? “It is now too late for such a plan.”
Chris Hensen, Martin Kuiper January 18, 2024 Reading time 3 minutes
Listening Reading list A
 b
 
ak
 
1
gr
 
b,
 
 
GO
Vld
‚
VA
N
us
 
Shall
N
Ë.=
 
-
BANTMS
 
ke
 
”:
 
 
à sk
 
_...
AFTER
 
AND
ut
|
Sar A
At
 
—
 
\
 
-#
 
X
on
de Lab _ Kd ee U - th D Le Jehan »
ns TTE 8 e : Bg 5 . ce - id 8 kh
% " 4 m ' Jaa Ke < ge.
 
...
ef and he 6 had 3 h, EE will ir nn. N á - A LA PEEL
' . |
IL ULLILL year SCC Wes LO POE 5 ot A iaffdsti UIJ VUL IAIGIIG
. . , . . .... ... Photo Jeffrey Groenewe
power plant that fell under such a system. In six years he sold , 9
only 52 euros worth of excess nitrogen rights, because no one wanted more
 pay. At the same time, he spent 8,000 to 11,000 euros annually on measuring
and recording the emissions from the power plant and the accountant reporting the figures
had to check.
The system flopped. If the government wants a nitrogen trading system to succeed, says
Lomme, she must first ensure that the offer is met
nitrogen rights is not too large.
On Thursday, the top boss of the Ministry of Economic Affairs argued
Climate in economists' magazine ESB for a similar nitrogen trading system. By means of
to convert nitrogen emissions from (farming) companies into rights
can be traded, emissions can be reduced, according to
top civil servant Sandor Gaastra. Just as is now happening with CO.
Gaastra's call goes against the government's policy that the
wants to restrict trade in nitrogen rights
In fact, that is a repetition. The nitrogen system that Lomme uses
was made, the plug was pulled in 2013 because it did not comply with the law
complied with a ruling by the Council of State. At Gaastra's proposal
is also critical: according to some experts it is not feasible, or even works
counterproductive.
 Gaastra makes his appeal in a personal capacity and it is striking. It goes against the grain
against the current government policy aimed at trading in nitrogen rights
properly restricted. There is now also an 'ad hoc' trade in those rights.
Companies can exchange their right to nitrogen precipitation with each other.
But the cabinet fears a fight over nitrogen scarcity, in which the
most wealthy companies come out on top. Besides farmers
Rijkswaterstaat, FrieslandCampina, the province of Brabant and Schiphol de
nitrogen market - and some purchases were controversial.
"Too late'
It is not entirely clear why Gaastra makes this call in the economic journal
It is clear, and whether his call is more widely supported within the ministry is also not clear. Are
proposal relies on a report released last summer, which also advocated
for regulated trading. That research went fairly unnoticed, says one
spokesperson for the Ministry of Economic Affairs.
Gaastra may make a second attempt to stimulate discussion about this.
Gaastra himself does not want to respond to his call. The Ministry of Economics
Affairs refers questions to the Ministry of Agriculture. That refers to
her turn back to Economic Affairs.
 Also read
Replace nitrogen rights with nitrogen obligations
According to energy specialist Lomme, it is too late to introduce such a system. The
The nitrogen problem is acute and an emissions trading system actually takes a lot of time
necessary. “It takes a number of years before you correct the initial mistakes,” says Lomme,
“but the water is now on our lips.” The Netherlands has been in one for a few years now
nitrogen crisis: nature is suffering and emissions must become drastic quickly
pushed back.
Professor Reyer Gerlagh from Tilburg University, who specializes in
economic issues surrounding the environment and climate, consider it a second best
solution. It can be much simpler, he says, by solving the nitrogen problem
basic approach: taxing the supply of nitrogen, for example
livestock feed and fertilizer. The government can also impose restrictions on vulnerable people
nature reserves can only be farmed organically and on a small scale, according to
it. But taxes are politically difficult. “It is politically easier to
trade emission allowances that you give away for free; you thereby give money to the
farmers."
Worth a lot of money
 Other experts fear that the possible arrival of a
nitrogen trading system puts a brake on tackling pollution. “It will be then
financially attractive to first maximize emissions so that you as a company
maximum benefits when rights are granted,” says Raoul
Beunen, associate professor at the Open University and expert on
nitrogen policy. “Such an approach is also at odds with the principle that...
polluter pays.”
ee,
Such a system is at odds with the polluter pays principle
Raoul Beunen — nitrogen policy expert
Government policy is precisely aimed at convincing so many farmers
to start farming organically, and that only works to a limited extent. Another
The negative effect is that large companies in particular will benefit from one
nitrogen trading system, says Beunen. Big companies buy up the small ones, says
he. “This stimulates economies of scale. That is at odds with the current nitrogen policy.”
Suppose Gaastra's system comes into existence, then consumers will also have to pay
keep up with higher prices for agricultural products, says Professor Gerlagh.
“We know from experience that the costs for these rights are passed on
with the CO. trade, even if farmers now complain that many consumers no longer
want to pay.”
 A version of this article also appeared in the January 19, 2024 newspaper.
Share 96 Email the editor Z
AGRICULTURE AND LIVESTOCK
The company 'Gebroeders C. and K. Kievit' is no more.
Oh well, what does it matter?
12 hours ago
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Hire an Editorial Team Mediahuis NRC
Working with a subscription Opinion editor NRC Carrière
Copyright Login The ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create account Colophon NRC Readers Fund
 Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
