Menu
nrc) WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
OPINION
Double nature, it is possible
Nature Nature is everywhere, you just have to give it space writes
food ranger Kaat Biesernans-Hoogewijs. With these four measures it is in ten
to create half a million hectares of new nature in a year.
March 1, 2024 at 11:15 AM Reading time 5 minutes
Listening 4) Reading list
 The fresh air is good for us and greenery has a beneficial effect on the body and Photo Eric Brinkhorst
 spirit. On the other hand, this animal species disturbs the peace and habitat of all kinds
other species. “Nature is too full,” concludes the ranger in despair
so from now on payment and reservations must be made. It will be your job
essence: whistle in the mouth, bicycle with big wheels under the butt, notebook on
bag and off you go, off to write receipts and check entrance tickets. I
I can imagine that the average forester has different expectations
his career began.
You can also argue the other way around. There aren't too many people,
there is simply (far) too little nature. The Netherlands has half
million hectares of nature for 17 million people. That's just
not three hundred square meters per person, the
surface of a tennis court with one along the four edges
margin of one meter. Man shares that tennis court with everyone
other living plants and animals in that area.
By comparison, the Netherlands has almost one million hectares
Kaat Biesemans-
pasture for 3.8 million cows - another large mammal.
Highly educated
Each cow has an outdoor area of 2,500 square meters
food ranger.
meters. That is more than a third of a football field, which they mainly use
with blades of grass and earthworms. A cow has in
The Netherlands has roughly eight times more outdoor play space than a person. We come
out of it.
 Also read
Nature is not full, but incorrectly arranged
The problem is that in the Netherlands we use a very narrow definition of nature.
We have nature in categories and management types with target species
subdivided and we anxiously try to convert that paper division into the real one
to keep the world afloat, on tightly limited plots of land. In reality the
nature is dynamic, potentially ubiquitous and averse to cadastral
boundaries. Bicycle and railway verges, front, rear and allotment gardens, city parks,
schoolyards, tree-lined avenues, vacant lots, city quays, fields, meadows,
ditches and pools; In principle, nature can take its course everywhere, provided that it does
that we give her space and time and do not work against her.
A world is under attack, especially on agricultural land and in rural areas
to gain dynamic new nature, by combining agriculture and nature
and connect, through regenerative agriculture.
This agriculture is based on four basic principles. One, don't cherish the soil
ploughing, milling, turning or flattening with heavy machinery. Half of
After all, biodiversity is in the soil, which we want to protect. Two,
embrace and increase (bio)diversity, so we welcome all native fauna
and flora and we combine a multitude of crops. Three, none
pesticides of any kind. Destroy pesticides
 life and destroy diversity, Nature actually loses its resilience and balance
the enormous diversity of living beings and organisms, Four, no fertilizer,
Artificial fertilizer puts soil life out of play and makes plants dependent on it
annual encore while, in collaboration with soil life, they are in excellent condition
are to feed themselves.
When we apply these four basic principles to the countryside, we can
with four tough measures, more than half a million hectares in ten years
create new nature. That is a solid doubling of the current one
surface area, while maintaining food security. How do we approach that?
Firstly, we flank all fences with mixed hedges. Hedges sheltered
the wind, provide nesting and shelter for small birds
underground soil life, provide food and shelter for insects,
their roots hold the soil, store rainwater and structure it
landscape. We can cover two hundred thousand kilometers in the Netherlands
planting, which will ultimately become a mosaic of forty thousand hectares
new nature,
Secondly, we provide ditches with nature-friendly banks, which provide banks
space for specific water and bank plants, attract water-loving birds and
form a breeding ground for dragonflies and small amphibians. A ditch with a
nature-friendly bank multiplies its water storage capacity and the
Various plants also improve water quality. We have 330,000
kilometer of ditch, not all ditches qualify for nature-friendly ditches
 banks, but even with just under half of the ditches this yields 75,000
hectares of new nature.
Thirdly, we sow all field edges with native flowers and herbs.
These attract all kinds of insects that pollinate crops and combat pest insects.
These flowery edges provide 22,000 hectares of new nature and an enormous one
biodiversity gain.
Fourthly, the hardest hit and at the same time the biggest blow, the grasslands
and corn fields. We all know that the livestock population must shrink. If we do
gradually, we can already fill the grasslands with shrubs and trees,
who will supply replacement products for the farmer. Berries, fruits, nuts,
insulation and building materials, vegetables (yes, you can make quite a lot of shrubs and trees
eating the leaves as a vegetable), care products. When the livestock herd is halved
we can do at least three hundred thousand hectares of grassland and ninety thousand
convert hectares of corn into tree meadows, biodiverse orchards and
food forests.
Also read
What should be given more space: nature or agriculture
and housing? The Netherlands is divided
Finally, the question that many well-meaning farmers and landowners wonder about
racking our brains: how are we going to finance this? Because subsidies are for nature
 minimal and it takes a number of years for the new nature to bear fruit,
literally and figuratively.
Here's my proposal. The European Union can, through the Green Deal and the eco-
regulations of the common agricultural policy, a first serious contribution
put in the bag. Our own government can contribute from the reserved amount
funds for peak loaders, who in principle do not have to stop, but their
can organize your company in a radically different way.
Coincidentally, new European regulations oblige companies to do so
to document and offset their environmental impact from 2024. No
better compensation imaginable than a few hectares of dynamic new growth
nature. Furthermore, it would be to the banks' advantage that this new nature would be generous and generous
interest-free financing, banks also have to consider their environmental impact
reduce.
And last but not least, the citizens (you and I), pay the farmer a fair price
pay for sustainable products and for a biodiverse landscape. The pioneers
of regenerative agriculture prove that there is good money in many ways
can be earned. A regenerative farm is a prime location for one
mini-campsite, a farm shop, company outings, heath days, courses and more
workshops, small-scale child and parent care, birthday and family parties,
yoga classes, photo shoots, local catering, the possibilities are endless. The experience
also learns that some of the citizens are happy to volunteer
the farm.
 Thus, an extraordinary alliance of banks, companies, farmers and...
citizens - with optimal cooperation from our government (read: a blank
permit for these four spatial projects) - more than half a million hectares
create new nature throughout the Netherlands in ten years.
The gay recreans will then be able to enjoy themselves to their heart's content
new nature. And the ranger? He can calmly use the binoculars again
Have a 'we-know-us' chat with the nature lover who enjoys it
to the old-style nature reserves.
Join the discussion on this topic and send a letter!
Would you like to respond to an article? Send a letter via this form (maximum 250 words)
to the NRC opinion editors.
A version of this article also appeared in the March 2, 2024 newspaper.
Share °% Email the editor
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
 Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest one
milk
21 hours ago
About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Hire an Editorial Team Mediahuis NRC
Working with a subscription Opinion editor NRC Carrière
Copyright Login The ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create account Colophon NRC Readers Fund
Terms of delivery Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My reading list Customer service
Our app My subscriptions Family messages
Archive Service & delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) E
