Photo Merlijn Doomernik
 Most farmers are constructive, says
editor-in-chief of agricultural trade magazine Nieuwe
Harvest
Esther de Snoo
The threat of radical farmers is paralyzing, says the editor-in-chief of the
agricultural trade magazine Nieuwe Oogst. “They get in the way of progress, especially farmers
so desperately needed.”
Karel Smouter February 10, 2024 Reading time
 
7 minutes
Listening d) Reading list A
Last week the phone rang at Esther de Snoo.
On the line was Harm Holman, Member of Parliament and agricultural spokesperson for NSC. The
Snoo is editor-in-chief of agricultural trade magazine Nieuwe Oogst, which is published weekly
30,000 farmers and gardeners are on the mat, and Holman wanted to share his vision
share agriculture. There would be an interview. Then, early this week, the
farmers' protests started again. FDF leader Mark van den Oever (Farmers Defence
Force) used threatening language towards politicians in a video in a setting of
burning tractor tires. Holman would also be “at the center of the
interest”. “After the video, Holman canceled the appointment
us,” says De Snoo.
 “The same with Minister Adema, we were busy arranging an appointment with him.
But his spokesperson said: we will wait until this week” Threats
of farmer administrators, politicians and the minister have been on for years, according to De Snoo
the order of the day. “There is more going on than what comes out about it,”
We speak to each other in a week full of new farmers' noise, this time not alone
The Netherlands but everywhere in Europe. The telephone was there at De Snoo
red hot, with journalists looking for an explanation of yet another twist
a saga that has been going on for almost five years now. De Snoo writes every week
an editorial, which makes her a well-known voice inside and outside
the sector makes. “We now live in a time of anger,” she wrote, for example
week. She started in this position on October 2019, a day known in farming circles as
went down in history: the Malieveld in The Hague filled up with people that day
at least 2,200 tractors and the farmers' protests led to the largest morning traffic jam
Dutch history. And a certain Caroline van der Plas presented that day
a book that would sow the seeds for a political party (BBB) that would last several years
would later become the largest in all twelve provinces.
That comment about “a time of anger” was exactly the same five years ago
can write, or not?
“Yes... Yes... That is true. Yet you also hear me doubting this question completely
to answer yes. Because I do see change too, Five years
Previously, many farmers were still in denial mode, digging in their heels
sand, but we - and I mean: the sector - have now come to an agreement that we
 have to let go of the old system and move towards a new agriculture.
What I find significant is, for example, that for green quality marks and
initiatives from companies such as FrieslandCampina and Nestlé now have a waiting list
consists. These projects are all oversubscribed.”
But why are the farmers' protests flaring up again?
“First of all: it is understandable that farmers are frustrated. It's about them
livelihood security. The fact that this theme has been put on the agenda is a great achievement
of the farmers' protests. But if you zoom out you also see: the balance between
agricultural and environmental boundaries must be restored. And then this just happens to be one
phase of the transition that we have to go through. The denial phase now follows
a period marked by confusion and uncertainty. Because the old
system may no longer work - for the quality of our water, the soil,
the air, but also for the farmer's revenue model - the new system is here
not yet, and that gives rise to a lot of fear and frustration in the farmers' protests
come outside. We've been waiting for that new dot on the horizon for so long now
perspective."
In recent years, three ministers have tried for this
to ensure that perspective. That started with Carola Schouten (Christian Union),
Minister of Agriculture between October 2017 and January 2022. She was talking about
circular agriculture, as a new ideal.
 “Yes, that was a good attempt. Which, by the way, continues to this day
it is unclear what exactly she meant by circular agriculture. But she was
clumsy towards the sector, for example by saying that she did not know with whom
she now had to speak if she wanted to get in touch with 'the farmers'. While, how
can it be difficult? With LTO and NAJK [Dutch Agricultural Youth Contact]
you have caught the majority of farmers and gardeners. Because of this attitude she has
alienating sector partners.”
Henk Staghouwer (Christian Union) took over until September 2022
Schouten takes over as minister. He came with a perspective letter, which he
eventually had to move back in. What went wrong there?
“Yes, I think he was too underweight for the position. He stayed too much in generalities
to talk. As a result, he did not have enough confidence.”
Then came Piet Adema (Christian Union), who - encouraged by the report
van Remkes - went into the country to listen to the concerns of farmers and
to reach an agricultural agreement together with the sector. Finally he got LTO
off the table, after which this attempt to offer perspective also failed.
“The aim of the process surrounding the agricultural agreement was to work together with the entire chain
and nature organizations to find an answer to the question of how the land and
horticulture should look like in 2040. At the sharing tables, where per
agricultural type agreements were made, it usually went quite well, but
at the main table it became too much of a hard political negotiation instead
 of an exploration to gain perspective together. It went away again
standards, levels and quantities. There has been a lack of true Remkes
called for: a conversation that damaged the trust between sector and government
recovers. Ultimately, I think, it's Ferninian leadership that creates connection
instead of for removal. Which leaves all the main characters in the end
were pointing at each other”
To the outside world it sometimes seems as if it is never good enough for farmers,
Moreover, it is always the other person's fault.
"Yes. At the same time, that may also be the gain of recent years. That
farmers have come to realize that they have to create prospects themselves. That's right
in a professional sector, that you do not look at others, but at yourself. It
trust in government is pretty much at the bottom. But from the
maybe the government shouldn't do it at all. When we were five years old
ago as a trade magazine we thought about our role, we decided: we want to be there for the
future-oriented farmer and gardener. That sounded a lot stranger then than it does now
the ears of our supporters. I wish Dutch farmers - the best educated
farmers in the world - more self-confidence. That they share their own
writing perspective letter”
 Farmers are demonstrating against European agricultural rules that they believe are too strict. The
protests have become more grim in recent times.
Photo Rob Engelaar
 But in the meantime you see the farmers' protest only getting grimmer. Er
There were even injuries this week as a result of blockades. And there
called on to free the two arrested demonstrators.
“That is something you always see with protest movements: over time, the
group of demonstrators smaller, but more radical, were in the hard core of the FDF
always few farmers. They are mainly contractors and people who have something to do with the
agricultural sector, but do not work in it. And that's where it comes lately
various groups, such as anti-government demonstrators and even
football supporters. Our reporters saw with their own eyes how...
protest, a number of vans of hooligans drove up. They just came to die
riots, On online farmer forums I see that the sentiment among many is: we understand the
frustration, but condemn the methods. People are even afraid that it will be counterproductive
works. FDF has much less support among farmers than you might think, especially in
ratio to how much attention they manage to generate, The FDF board member that
participated in the readings, Sieta van Keimpema, for example, does not have it
saved.”
Have you ever been a target yourself?
“One of our cameramen sometimes got pushed during a demonstration. And we
once wrote a news item about the NCTV (National Coordinator
Counterterrorism and Security), which FDF has in its sights. FDF then called
to 'bombard' our editorial staff with messages. That remained at a few dozen
 emails, but our editorial staff was very frightened that day. And I thought to myself: me
need to take it easy in my comments”
Do you think the Agricultural Agreement would have been achieved if the atmosphere had not been like this?
was intimidating?
“I find that very difficult to say. But it is certainly true that the process is under
pressure from the rearguard has come to a standstill. The threat works
paralyzing, especially for all those farmers - the majority, as is proven time and time again
research - who simply want to move forward and be constructive. Radical
protesters have taken the debate hostage and are standing in the way of progress
that farmers so desperately need”
But why don't those moderate farmers take action? Are they all?
anxious?
“I have also argued for this in a comment: more attention to it
the large group of moderate farmers. But you see that a lot of them are just too busy
are optimizing their business for the future. And yes, there is too
fear and peer pressure. Farmers who did not hang their flag upside down
were sometimes visited by colleagues asking why they did not participate. A
part of the moderate farmers will be sensitive to this.”
 In the meantime, the protest seems to be paying off. These are the agricultural goals again
disappeared from the plans of Climate Commissioner Hoekstra. Also a proposal
am to halve the use of pesticides was withdrawn this week.
“Yes, of course the Dutch elections are also being watched in Brussels,
where in 2022 first the BBB and then the PVV won the elections. Ursula Von
der Leyen ÍCDU, Commission President]) sees the European elections coming
and tries to take the wind out of the sails of populist parties in advance
by addressing farmers' concerns.”
On the one hand, farmers say they do not feel heard, but on the other hand, the
farmers' lobby regularly has its way, how can that be reconciled?
“A farmer is at the very beginning of a chain and actually has...
hardly any influence on how that chain runs. He does not determine the price himself
is paid for its products and is subject to one rule after another
poured out. Not only from the government, but also from multinationals such as Nestlé,
Danone and Cargill, which as companies are all committed to ambitious natural and environmental challenges
environmental authorities have committed. He must comply with those rules, while the
The market hardly compensates him for this. The subsidies that Europe
for sustainability, the figure is also lower than post-war
income guarantees that farmers were used to. These are being phased out.”
your comment about a 'time of anger' ends with what you think it means
must follow: a period of reconciliation. What needs to be done about this
 to calm the new wave of farmers' protests?
“In any case, it does not help to simply accept all the demands of radical farmers
to throw all environmental policies off the table. That's just how it is
that achieving climate and environmental goals is done through the farm. But farmers
must feel that they are facing the great challenge of a transition to a new one
agriculture does not have to be tackled alone. In addition to the government, this also includes the
market to compensate farmers for the role they play in the transition.
That realization now seems to be taking hold. I find it hopeful, for example, that the Rabobank
has been gaining momentum since the arrival of Alex Datemna, the new Food & Agri director.
Sustainability is now a priority for that bank when taking out new loans
hard requirement. The next phase in the transition to sustainable agriculture is
Hopefully farmers will see that a change really pays off.”
Esther de Snoo (b1) has been editor-in-chief of Nieuwe Oogst since October 2019,
of the LTO. She previously worked for titles such as Harvest and Farm. She won in 2013
the Golden Handle for best agricultural journalism and was elected in 2022
by Food100 to Foodheld. She lives in Den with her partner and four children
Bosch.
A version of this article also appeared in the February 10, 2024 newspaper.
Share 9% Email the editor Z
 NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
15 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest one
milk
20 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
