= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
OPINION
Things need to change: only at fair prices
the farmer can spare nature
Agriculture Consumers have to pay more for milk, meat and vegetables, writes
Dirk Schoenmaker. Only then can the farmer spare nature.
February 2024 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening 4) Reading list
 reverse necessary rules. The honest story is that food prices
 have to go up.
An adequate revenue model is the starting point to get out of the
agricultural impasse in Europe. Farmers have figured it out
the low margins now do not provide the financial space at all
to implement environmental regulations, and are annoyed by increasing
interference of 'the city' (the government) with the countryside.
Also read: https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2024/02/01/stap-over-
Dirk Schoenmaker is
on-organic-farming-I-don't-regret-it-a4188818
professor of financing
the Erasmus University and
member of the Sustainable
No longer food bank lines
Finance Lab.
The challenge is not to make this transition via major steps
subsidy flows to producers (the supply side).
do, as the current European agricultural policy does. I suggest doing it through the
consumer (Demand side) through a 'fair' price in the supermarket
healthy agricultural products, which are produced with respect for nature and animals
came. A fair price means that the social side (an adequate income
for the farmer) and the environmental side (costs of meeting standards for nature
and animal) are included in the price and are no longer part of the company
passed on.
The price for vegetables, fruit, meat and dairy will then be higher. Flanking social
policies for lower income groups are needed to compensate them for that
 increased prices. In Brussels jargon this is called 'a
 
just transition'. This is very important
from a social perspective; longer lines at food banks
really be prevented.
French President Macron forgot this compensation when introducing it
higher fuel taxes in France. This led to the great protest movement of
the yellow vests. And then the excise tax increase was reversed, as is now the case
Brussels applies environmental regulations and diesel excise duties for agriculture.
Fair prices are a correction to the latter's too low food prices
decades. Through economies of scale and intensification, fueled by Brussels
subsidies, prices have fallen. While before the Second World War food still
29 percent of the family budget, this has now fallen to 13 percent.
Supermarkets also play a major role; they have market power in the chain
between farmer and consumer and are responsible for a continuous reduction
of the milk price. It therefore requires coordinated action to achieve fair prices
including compensation for the lowest incomes.
The increase in scale and intensification of agriculture are the main causes
the decline in nature. Cheap animal feed from Latin America and
extensive use of fertilizers has not only increased production, but
also nitrogen emissions and manure surpluses. Use of pesticides and
penicillin leads to unhealthy food and loss of soil and water quality.
Compliance with the European Water Directive is the next problem
presents.
 Key question
So things have to change. We are still looking for the shape: central
government regulation, regional regulation or self-regulation with sanctions. The
The government must work with the sector to create a future-proof business model
to build.
The key question is what do we do with the world market price of food. At the
carbon tax has been found to be a good solution. To move
to prevent carbon-intensive production abroad, the
European Union introduced a levy on the import of carbon-intensive
goods. Such a border tax for non-environmentally friendly products is also in place
introduce agriculture. Europe exports its environmental policy in this way.
Pressing the pause button, as is now the case when environmental regulations are introduced, offers no benefit
solace. Intensive farmers can no longer get a loan from the bank;
business adjustments or takeovers are at a standstill. Organic farmers are reluctant
the extra costs without any prospect of a 'fair' compensation. With the
A structural solution of fair prices can help the agricultural sector escape this impasse
come.
A version of this article also appeared in the February 8, 2024 newspaper.
Share Email the editor
 AGRICULTURE AND LIVESTOCK
The company 'Gebroeders C. and K. Kievit' is no more.
Oh well, what does it matter?
13 hours ago
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
