mm This is an article from the NRC archive ®
N.B. Elements may be missing from this print version.
Ecological farming in return
ground
Nature management Staatsbosbeheer makes agreements with farmers: who is his profession
nature-friendly business is allowed to lease additional natural land.
Ö ArjenSchreuder © June 6, 2018 Ô Reading time
2 minutes
 
 When leasing natural land from Staatsbosbeheer, such as at the Reeuwijkse Plassen, the farmer is obliged to take certain
to achieve nature goals.
 Photo Rien Zilfold ta
All cows have names. Ardy de Goeij stands next to a newborn calf in the stable and
consults his phone. “This is Nellie 158” The organic dairy farmer is one of the
forty farmers with whom Staatsbosbeheer will conclude contracts from Thursday: who promises
works in a nature-friendly manner throughout his company, may lease additional natural land from
Staatsbosbeheer. “So that nature in the entire area benefits from it,” says the forester
Luuk Oevermans.
We are in Oukoop, a spot near the Reeuwijkse Plassen in South Holland. Out of this
cattle pasture area, after a land consolidation fifteen years ago, most farmers are now in the area
left. Since then, Staatsbosbeheer has managed a lot of nature there. You can take nice walks there,
serenaded by meadow birds such as godwit, redshank and lapwing. De Goeij decided at the
land consolidation. “I was too attached to this beautiful area, and my
friends and family,” he says.
The more land, the more nature-friendly you can farm. De Goeij, married and two
children, has 148 dairy cows plus young cattle. They graze on his own 106 hectares of land and
He recently leased another 80 hectares from Staatsbosbeheer.
The number of cows is therefore relatively low, the so-called grazing pressure is at De
Goeij averages less than one cow per hectare. He also uses little fertilizer. All manure
comes from our own potting stable. The manure consists of reed, straw and feces and is good for the
biodiversity on land. “There are a lot of worms and insects in it,” says De Goeij. For the
ideal mixture for his potting stable, De Goeij currently still buys reed from France, but he will soon be doing it
use reeds from the Reeuwijkse Plassen. “What could be more beautiful than this reed?
to use?" says ranger Oevermans.
 Staatsbosbeheer leases approximately 50,000 hectares of natural land to farmers. Maximum 4,000
hectares may be eligible for lease to “motivated” natural farmers who are
also oblige to work in an ecologically responsible manner in the rest of their company.
Staatsbosbeheer wants to contribute to the "transition" with the forty experiments
towards a more 'nature-inclusive agriculture', Officially: 'Contributing to
conservation and development of biodiversity in the Netherlands through more extensive agricultural holdings
also on the farmer's own agricultural land adjacent to the nature reserve”
Like Ardy de Goeij. He uses neither fertilizer nor pesticides. Weeds he goes
to attack mechanically; a machine cuts away the heads of the weeds so that there are no seeds
be distributed. The cows are fed herb-rich grass instead of the usual
Perennial ryegrass. They also get organic concentrates, potatoes for example. Daily
his cows produce 22 liters per day. “That is relatively little. But that also makes them whole
healthy. They are almost never sick”
By leasing natural land, the farmer is obliged to achieve certain nature objectives:
'damp meadow bird landscape', for example, and leased in another part of De Goeijs
ground, the botanical regime applies to grassland rich in herbs and fauna'. That means:
no fertilizer at all.
We walk across the land and see cows trudging in the distance, in the direction of the
Reeuwijkse Plassen. The cows are usually outside and lay three to four eggs a day
kilometers away, De Goeij: “We have chosen a vital breed, a cross of three breeds
with strong leg muscles, cows that can walk well?” The cows walk unaccompanied.
“We drive them a little bit, and then they find their own way.” So difficult
is not that. “When you walk into a pub, you know where the bar is, right?”
