= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws df} Podcasts [F| Digital newspaper Q v
COLUMN STEPHAN SANDERS
Between the lines on the banners
another message
July 11, 2022 Reading time 1 minute
Reading list |
follow
Advertisement
Tj and ad text: 'With a dog whistle
— you can immediately pull the
| | attention: I wasn't thinking about dogs, I was thinking
to radical farmers who use large equipment in Shall we
6 something more fun
to revolt. They are now starting to get that attention
from the whole country, from city dwellers and outsiders. | __with that barrel
 By the way, the entire text of the advertisement reads: 'With
You can even draw a dog whistle from a great distance
your dog's attention immediately:
But you can also use such a whistle for political purposes
to use. The banners of angry farmers are on them
unmistakable lyrics: 'THE WAR IS
WE STARTED WINNING', but what I mean among all those
reading through heavy lines is something else. That those
uprising of angry peasants the only righteous one
Dutch uprising, because something like it applies here
n
birthright. That's too long for a banner,
More info >
PA5
but the implicit message I hear.
Growing up in Twente, and not in Enschede, there were
children of farmers at my primary school; I was friends with some, me
came to their house. Jumping in a ditch, catching tadpoles in a glass jar,
helping out on the farm... No, I'd rather not, because as a child I was afraid of the
most animals. Everyone found that perfectly understandable, because I spoke
High Dutch, and besides, with my appearance I belonged to one
outside category. Not from here, but from there. The city, the west, or even further
away.
Viewed from the countryside, the relationship with the city is ambiguous: multiple
and feelings of inferiority constantly alternate. City people
 know nothing about real life, but also: beware of city people, because they
always outsmart you. Those people from the west should not think that they are anything more
than U.S. Those people don't do that either, the sad thing is that most city dwellers do
hardly any reflection on the countryside.
In any case, the actions of farmers have put an end to that abuse: it
country wallows in peasant anger.
Underneath this lies the idea that farmers are the backbone of the country, and
belong to the category of the real, indisputable Dutchmen. I often have
thought about the seemingly incomprehensible alliance between Baudet
and farmers, but in any case they share the grievance. Who himself it
grants birthright, must be as hot as those privileges
is torn.
The annoying thing is that there is no birthright to be forgiven in the Netherlands:
it is not a family, but a constitutional state, and the Dutch passport is possible
expired, but does not become more valuable the longer it is in the family.
This misunderstanding must also be cleared up - just like the nitrogen.
Stephan Sanders writes a column here every Monday.
A version of this article also appeared in the July 11, 2022 newspaper.
Share <6 Email the editor
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
