= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
BACKGROUND
Hardly anyone wants to talk about it anymore
nitrogen and 2030, also Frans Timmermans
not 
Nitrogen The party leader of GroenLinks-PvdA no longer wants to commit to one
year to halve nitrogen. It is a sensitive issue among the supporters, but with
nitrogen targets do not win you votes.
Eppo König, Philip de Witt Wijnen November 7, 2023 Reading time 3 minutes
Listening d) Reading list A
 1 LE VV, 1st who ep We
ermans tide de s a Camnpagne-evV. And in the Oosterpoort, Groningen.
wanted to fiddle with the nitrogen dates
 
and. Hold on
 
nde en Ae SpIddK O e p 9
Photo Siese Veenstra / ANP
 cabinet in political problems about this: in August 2022 and this spring after the
Provincial Council elections.
Six months later, at election time, it was French, of all people
Timmermans from the combined GroenLinks-PvdA list who does exactly that
with which former CDA leader Wopke Hoekstra undermines government policy
got. The 2030 'nitrogen deadline' is no longer sacrosanct for Timmermans either.
Both in last Sunday's RTL election debate and in the one-on-one
debate with Pieter Omtzigt in Arnhem, Timmermans distanced himself from his own
election manifesto. It states: “We adhere to the goal of...
to halve nitrogen emissions by 2030.”
Don't miss anything about politics?
Write
sign up for a political package and receive all the news via
 
a newsletter, podcast and follow-up topics.
Timmermans thinks it is more important, he said on TV on Sunday evening, to “deal with it
young farmers to come out together” than “stick to exactly what we have in it
have agreed on an election programme.” He declared himself a week earlier
not wanting to set the nitrogen targets 'on a yearly basis'.
 Remarkable twist
It is a remarkable turn for the 'united left' that, especially from
Groenlinks, the Rutte cabinet wanted to focus on nature and environment
to hold. Although GroenLinks MP Laura Bromet sees it differently. She was Sunday
he attended the debate and heard “the diplomat in Timmermans”. "He has
would like to indicate that if you want to overcome the polarization on this file, it
Dragging your election manifesto won't get you much further. Our goals
for nature restoration are still standing," she says.
Within GroenLinks there is also criticism of Timmermans' relaxation of the
nitrogen position, although not everyone wants to do that openly during campaign time.
Roshano Dewnarain, faction leader in the municipal council of Central
Groningen, calls it “absolutely not a useful action” by Timmermans. "In
In principle, everyone must adhere to the election manifesto, including the
party leader, Although there may be some room for maneuver in the debate.”
Hagar Roijackers, deputy for Nature in the province of North Brabant, thinks so
“the anchor of a date remains necessary,” but that it is “for the necessary
At the same time, nature conservation is not about the date, it's about the choices
that you make to achieve reduction and the means you are prepared to do so
to deploy.”
Other parties that support a strict nitrogen policy consider it weak
story of Timmermans.
 Member of Parliament Tjeerd de Groot of D66: “Nature and the climate are not in good hands
waiting for political parties to put their green ideals on sale.” He
finds it particularly painful for GroenLinks. “That was my ally for a long time.”
Also read
How will the Netherlands emerge from the nitrogen crisis? 1 p
'£
Approving responses
Timmermans received support from parties that have long wanted to weaken the nitrogen policy
approving responses. “I genuinely think it's good when politicians dare to express their opinions
change,” tweeted CDA party leader Henri Bontenbal, for example. "I still have
a few suggestions, Frans.”
“Fumbling around with deadlines”, as Timmermans does, is bad news for the
nature, says Hank Bartelink of LandschappenNL, one of the parties involved
negotiated the collapsed Agriculture Agreement. “Any postponement of
recovery measures not only mean further deterioration of nature,
but also leads to a further increase in recovery costs.”
But abandoning it by 2030 will have major consequences for nitrogen policy
GroenLinks-PvdA probably do not have that. Because Timmermans is not there
determines the first. The outgoing cabinet may not formally have any
distanced from 2030, but in fact yes. The coalition parties VVD, CDA and
 The Christian Union does not have 2030 as a target year in their election manifesto
- only D66 still has that.
On the right flank, opposition parties PVV, BBB, JA21, SGP, Forum have the lead
Democracy and BVNL 2030 never supported. On the left the Party jumps for the
Remove animals that want not 50, but certainly 70 percent less nitrogen emissions by 2030
than in 2020.
GroenLinks in particular wanted the cabinets on nature and
keep the environment on track
In fact, the entire nitrogen approach has gone back to square one since the fall of the cabinet. The
maximum speed has been reduced from 130 to 100 kilometers per hour to be cleaner
to ride. There is a voluntary buyout scheme for large emitters, the peak loaders.
But the ambitious Rutte IV cabinet has not gone much further than that
tackle nitrogen. A new cabinet will have to have a new nitrogen policy
also to restart licensing in construction.
You hear surprisingly little about such a new policy this campaign, because...
Nitrogen targets do not attract votes. New Social Contract (NSC) says one
to have a new nitrogen policy - although some views are also reflected in
other parties. Pieter Omtzigt's party wants to halve nitrogen emissions
 in 2035, as stated in the law. A policy aimed at fewer emissions instead of
on nitrogen precipitation. More space for farmers to arrange how they do it themselves
pollute less. NSC also emphasizes that we need to do more in policy
looking at the true state of nature, rather than just being focused
on nitrogen.
This is endorsed by scientists, and it is a welcome distraction
after years of farmers' protests and political discussions about nitrogen.
You could also hear Frans Timmermans from GroenLinks-PvdA say it on Sunday
the RTL debate: “We talk about years, but we have to talk about the
nature. It is in poor condition in the Netherlands.”
A version of this article also appeared in the November 8, 2023 newspaper.
Share <6 Email the editor
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
 Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest one
milk
21 hours ago
MIC > About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Hire an Editorial Team Mediahuis NRC
Working with a subscription Opinion editor NRC Carrière
Copyright Login The ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create account Colophon NRC Readers Fund
Terms of delivery Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My reading list Customer service
Our app My subscriptions Family messages
Archive Service & delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
