12/5/22, 12:40 PM Column | The organization of our country has been left to fate and the market for too long - NRC
Opinion
N.B. Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
03:17
The structure of our country is too long
left to fate and the market
Ö Christiaan Weijts © 4november2022 Ô Reading time 1 minute
ok i love nature, but i would
don't like to sacrifice the climate.
Porthos, a large CO» storage project,
is now in danger of being stranded by the latest
plot twist in the nitrogen tragedy. Many others
sustainability projects as well.
Windmills, solar parks: none
You don't build them with petrol engines.
In fact, the Council of State is now ordering omelettes
without breaking a single egg.
Insufferable. Especially if you read Remkes' Not everything
can (2019) again, and in a
pie chart reads that the entire construction sector is only 0.6 percent of the problem.
Don't get me wrong. I too love Lady Justice's blindfold - all polluters are
right - but I would not like to sacrifice common sense for it. And who forces
our ministers to also walk around with that same blindfold? Some vision
is quite welcome when organizing a country.
That in itself was why those exemptions for housing construction and sustainability were so crazy
not yet. Prefer starter homes than mega stables. Better clean energy than one
chicken shed. That was the underlying political vision.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/04/eieren-breaking-a4147255?t=1670240046 1/2
 12/5/22, 12:40 PM Column | The organization of our country has been left to fate and the market for too long - NRC
Only: they were bad checks. The disadvantage of nitrogen space is that you don't have it
you can print carelessly. Politicians did not dare to choose who should have space
sacrificing which eggs had to be broken for all those ambitious bouncers. But
only toddlers can hide by closing their eyes.
For too long, the organization of our country has been left to 1) the market and 2) countless forces
that take us by surprise again and again (natural damage, asylum influx, geopolitical strife,
global warming, the arrival of the wolf).
Fate and market. Above our heads, above our wide rivers, they work up slowly
into each other. They wage their battle in our landscape and the result of those forces is the
living environment that we, residents, have to make do with.
It's amazing, for a democracy, how little influence we seem to have on this. What
do we want? Buying up farms for wider highways? How much nature? How many
inhabitants? Citizens and representatives must find a solution between market and fate
can form a buffer against arbitrariness.
How many pastures? How many mega stables? What prevents us from being realistic
to make a future plan for immigration, before the major climate migrations
come robberies?
All polluters are equal, but in my opinion some are just a little more equal
others. If you put that 0.6 percent next to the nitrogen giants - agriculture (46 percent) and
abroad (32 percent) - then it is clear where we should get the space from.
Correct. Invade Germany, bomb the Ruhr area and redevelop it into
a second Veluwe. If that turns out to be an impregnable eggshell, we can at least
start at the Gelderland bird flu valley.
Christiaan Weijts writes a column here every Friday.
A version of this article also appeared in the November 4, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/04/eieren-breaking-a4147255?t=1670240046 2/2
