= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
BACKGROUND
Farmers Get a reprieve, but European
agricultural challenge remains
European agricultural policy The planned greening of European agriculture is
barely got off the ground, but the honking farmers still managed to make concessions
after enforcing a concession.
Clara van de Wiel February 9, 2024 Reading time 4 minutes
Listening Reading list A
 and And.
from the table.
Photo Sameer Al-Doumy/AFP
 It was the third European compensation in less than a week
protesting farmers, after suspending a nature rule and restricting it
reducing agricultural emissions from a climate plan later that Tuesday
come.
It showed: just like in The Hague, the honking tractor in Brussels appears to be one
political factor of importance. Especially now that there are elections for the European Parliament
approaching and no politician wants to be known as the tormentor of the European farmer.
Agriculture is simply an area where EU policy may be of interest to citizens
most directly affects. Roughly 22 percent of farmers' income comes from European sources
subsidies and without that European money tap, the vast majority of farmers would
unable to keep their heads above water.
But the concessions were striking. Especially since the previously planned
greening of European agriculture is actually barely out of the question
starting blocks. Farmers are, as climate analyst Simone Tagliapietra said
the Brussels think tank Bruegel this week on X “ironically speaking, precisely one
category that has so far been largely spared from European greenery
policy",
Taxing emissions
At the same time, it recently became clear again that achieving the
climate goals, agriculture cannot be left out of harm's way. Although the share
 of agriculture, the total greenhouse gas emissions are relatively small at 10 percent,
These emissions have hardly decreased for years, while elsewhere this is happening quickly. "It
lack of emissions reductions in the agricultural sector since 2005 underlines the
need for stronger incentives in this sector,” wrote the main one
Commission's climate advisory board recently published a leading report.
The advisory council also described some of these possible incentives. For example it
taxing emissions, as is the case for heavy industry and others
shipping happens. Or focusing more on limiting meat consumption
dairy consumption - something that, according to the European advisory council, could be halved
the livestock population and could therefore lead to a significant reduction in emissions.
None of those recommendations are seriously on the table yet. There is little in Brussels
more sensitive than food politics and possible European interference with national ones
culinary traditions. And now the EU is joining, for example, digital technology and
battery development is being outpaced by China and the US, it is cheap,
safe and plentiful European food perhaps even more so than before
a symbol of pride and stability.
In a paean to the European farmer, Von der Leyen mentioned the European
food system this week “unique”. “The products in our supermarkets
reflect the diversity of our cultures and traditions. Europe has
the healthiest and highest quality food in the world. Thanks to our
farmers!"
 When it comes to farmers, agriculture and food, the discussion quickly becomes
emotional. And you quickly get bogged down in a culture war. Farmers, emphasized
for example, party leader of the Christian Democrats Manfred Weber this week
the European Parliament, “have no interest in left-wing ideologies that do everything to them
dictate!"
Economic complexity
This is not the only reason that agriculture may be the most complicated
climate puzzle belongs to the EU. In an analysis of the failure of the recent
European attempts to green agriculture, points out the French
agricultural economist Pierre-Marie Aubert mainly points out that they paid too little attention
for the total economic picture. When the EU announced its agricultural strategy in 2020
presented, the biggest criticism came from the US, for example, which immediately presented all kinds of
feared consequences for world trade. About the consequences of it
upending the existing agricultural model for trade policy, the
According to Aubert, the labor market or price pressure for consumers was still too little
thought about it, he told Libération last week. “We need that economic
bringing complexity back into ecological reasoning.”
In the past there was always one important reason that farmers were angry at Brussels
draw: too low prices. It makes the current wave of demonstrations interesting, says
Irish emeritus professor of European agricultural policy Alan Matthews in conversation
with NRC. He made a European comparison of agricultural incomes and
 notes: “The trend is that the average income is increasing, and although
incomes did indeed fall in 2023, this came after a record high in 2022.
Matthews hastens to emphasize: that does not mean that all farmers in the EU are there
are financially comfortable. Moreover, there is one main reason for the rising
average: that the number of farmers continues to decrease. “You can definitely wonder if
that is a desirable development, but it has also been a structural one for decades
trend, which is partly inevitable because it is often simply the way it is
It is easier to be competitive when your company is larger”
According to Matthews, farmers are focusing more than they are on current price pressure
therefore against an age-old enemy: that the standard of living is now in the field
increases faster than in its own sector. And that's it for many farmers
whether it would ultimately be more attractive for their children to do something else.
“That is the challenge for Europe: to create a way of farming that does
attractive enough and at the same time in harmony with nature and the environment,” says
Matthews.
Flower strips
Not that Brussels has not made attempts to do so. For example by
introducing so-called 'eco schemes': linking direct
agricultural subsidies for nature and climate regulation, from 2025 will be 25 percent
of agricultural money is distributed in this way, for example for the construction of flower strips
 or ditches. It should also give farmers income that is less linked to
just produce more.
And, Matthews emphasizes: there are certainly hopeful ones in several countries
signals to be seen. For example in Ireland, where the use of fertilizer is decreasing
and the number of farmers is no longer shrinking, but many farmers have additional income
to have. And in Denmark, which has decided to get started itself
with an emissions trading system for agriculture, as has been in place in the EU for years
for industry and is seen as crucial in reducing CO
emissions. “If that becomes a success, it can be an example for Europe.”
This will have no effect in the short term. And for the European CO targets
That won't make much difference in 2030 - the EU can do without it
achieve agricultural share. But for the years to come, and for the according to experts
crucial improvement of European biodiversity, Brussels is not included
agricultural puzzle.
A version of this article also appeared in the February 10, 2024 newspaper.
Share e% Email the editor
AGRICULTURE AND LIVESTOCK
 The company 'Gebroeders C. and K. Kievit' is no more.
Oh well, what does it matter?
11 hours ago
EL
 
nnen
 
el ED EN and En nn
Î Î
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
15 hours ago
My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
