= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [E] Digitalekrant Q
NEWS
Brussels provides new guidance to farmers:
pesticide reduction off the table
Green deal In response to farmers' protests, Ursula von der Leyen withdrew the
pesticides law. That is a new setback for the European plans
to make agriculture more sustainable.
Clara van de Wiel February 6, 2024 Reading time 1 minute
Listening Reading list A
 pesticides in the EU permanently
Pull. It means a new setback for the
 European greening plans for agriculture,
part of the so-called Green Deal.
Also read
The tractors also appear in Brussels
the green plans disappear
The decision comes on a day that was actually supposed to mark a new,
more ambitious climate target - 90 percent CO reduction by 2040 - than the European one
Commission will present later this Tuesday. This is already clear in that proposal
any last-minute reference to reducing agricultural emissions
has been deleted. This is also a response to the farmers' protests.
According to Von der Leyen, the pesticide law is a "symbol of polarization"
she said on Tuesday morning in the European Parliament in Strasbourg. In
In response to the farmers' protests, the Commission already canceled one last week
measure intended to improve biodiversity and is considering them
to introduce import restrictions on agricultural products from Ukraine.
It is very exceptional that the European Commission withdraws a bill.
The decision follows after the European Parliament approved the pesticide plan last November
had already rejected. A group of EU member states attempted this in recent weeks
to further develop the proposal, and then try to gain support in it
 European parliament. Now that the Commission is withdrawing the proposal, that is no longer the case
possible.
Biodiversity
The pesticide law was the backbone of a plan to also...
include agriculture in European climate and nature plans. In the law
included binding reduction targets for member states and a ban
use of pesticides in 'vulnerable areas', such as city parks, playgrounds and
in the vicinity of schools and sports fields.
Also read
The rate at which animals and plants become extinct,
was not this high in ten million years
The reason for the law was the dramatic state of biodiversity in Europe,
which, as numerous studies have shown, is directly related to the large-scale
use of chemical pesticides. Now that the law is being withdrawn,
the European target for reducing the use of pesticides by 2030 will disappear
to be halved, permanently out of the picture.
According to Von der Leyen, there is a chance that the Commission will come up with one later
new 'much more mature' proposal for reduction of pesticides.
She left open whether that will actually happen and over what period of time.
 Share Email the editor
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
15 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest one
milk
20 hours ago
About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Hire an Editorial Team Mediahuis NRC
Working with a subscription Opinion editor NRC Carrière
Copyright Login The ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create account Colophon NRC Readers Fund
Terms of delivery Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My reading list Customer service
 Our app My subscriptions Family messages
Archive Service & delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
