12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before mass protests against the nitrogen policy also arise in Flanders' - NRC
N.B. Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
11:04
Report
'Just a matter of time
before also in
Flanders massive
protests against it
nitrogen policy emerged'
Nitrogen protest Just like in the Netherlands, Belgians must also
farmers significantly reduce their nitrogen emissions. The concerns about the
consequences for the sector are increasing, as is the resistance.
E
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-schermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 1/7
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before mass protests against the nitrogen policy also arise in Flanders' - NRC
Goat farmer Renaat Devreese (59) walks through the wet, tall grass in sopping sandals
towards a part of his country that could cost him dearly. He
points to the plot edges that he describes as a kilometer of 'wooded edges and
hawthorn hedges” has demarcated. Looks nice, and the plants serve as a buffer
against pesticides and fertilizer drifting over from a neighbor who isn't like him
organic farming. Further on he dug two pools. There are now all kinds of reeds growing around it.
Devreese believes: your farm should radiate the same quality as your product. So when he
35 years ago the company of a retired couple in the West Flemish coastal village of De
Haan took over, he first started decorating the place. Until then there was in the wide
perimeter nothing but grassland. Over the years, an area of ten hectares was created
large where species flourish. The farm continued to grow. Initially it had
Feared thirty goats, now there are three hundred. They graze in semi-open stables.
Because Devreese has an organic company, he is not allowed to leave his stables
close off the outside world. That couldn't hurt, he thought, because goat farm 't Reigershof
is not located near a protected nature reserve. But when he recently met one
online calculation tool of the Flemish government looked at his 'mpact score', he got the
fright of his life.
The piece of land he created himself turned out to have been designated without his knowledge
a so-called 'search zone'. That is an area that the Flemish government keeps in option
for the realization of a protection area in the future, if this is necessary
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-schermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 2/7
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before mass protests against the nitrogen policy also arise in Flanders' - NRC
achieve nitrogen targets. “Apparently there have been people on my land who
have seen certain turf and species that are not there elsewhere,” says Devreese
indignant. “Suddenly we are less than a kilometer from a nature reserve
that only came about because of our way of farming. If this is officially as
is classified as a protected area, then we may have to go back to two hundred
goats. Then everything falls apart?” Because if there is a third loss of turnover, his company is not
profitable for longer.
Uncertain future
Renaat Devreese is not the only farmer in Flanders who is at a loss.
Since the Flemish government published a final version of the
Programmatic Approach to Nitrogen (PAS) reached agreements in some sectors
(chickens, pigs) requiring a 60 percent nitrogen reduction by 2030 is the future
of thousands of farmers insecure. Just like in the Netherlands, Flemish farmers therefore use the
took to the streets to protest against the nitrogen policy. This Wednesday evening there is one
large demonstration planned along several highways (although the Belgian farmers
do not intend to block those highways for the time being). The Flemish farmers
With their action they also want to show Dutch farmers that they are "not alone",
they report in a press release.
Also read this article about it
previous farmers' protests in Brussels
Just like in the Netherlands, the Flemish government has also been working on a PAS for years. Netherlands and
In that order, Belgium are the undisputed leaders when it comes to nitrogen emissions.
Nowhere else are so many livestock kept in such a small area. Agriculture is
responsible for more than 53 percent of total nitrogen emissions in Flanders -
nitrogen oxides and ammonia.
Research has shown that both Dutch and Flemish nature are affected by a...
large nitrogen deposition causes respiratory distress. The Flemish Environment Agency calculated this
critical in 80 percent of the protected nature reserves in Flanders
threshold value has been exceeded. The situation is favorable in only three of the 64 areas.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-schermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 3/7
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before mass protests against the nitrogen policy also arise in Flanders' - NRC
Letter on the mat
In 2015, farms in Flanders received a letter on their doorstep informing them
impact score on nearby nature reserves was stated. There was coloring
worked; with a green letter, up to 5 percent impact, a farmer could expand, with orange -
to 50 percent - expansion was impossible. And they farm for 50 percent or more
were responsible for the nitrogen impact on a nature reserve, would after the
If a permit expires, you will no longer be able to obtain a new one.
With a green letter in his hand, Gunter Klaasen (43) dared to do it in 2015
to give up his well-paid job in IT and to sell off his self-built home
and buy his father's farm together with his wife Daisy.
He became the fourth generation of Klaasen to live on the Arendonksesteenweg in Ravels, nearby
the border with the Netherlands, started farming. Green meant permission
to expand, so Klaasen took out a loan of 2 million euros to build two new ones
to build stables. He left an expensive low-ammonia emission system in the roof
construct. Despite tens of thousands of extra chickens - he now has 124,000 - his
nitrogen emissions do not increase as a result.
At home, Klaasen sits at the kitchen table, wrapped in his clothes
a black shirt with 'SAVE THE FARMER' on his chest,
see the permit for the expansion, while
Daisy behind him is eating rice with chicken fillet
baking. The last letter dates from January 2020.
It took more than a year, but then there were...
two brand new stables next to two old ones
copies. The stables had only just been opened
then use the nitrogen problem
Flanders gained momentum.
Got a chicken stable near Hasselt
no permit to expand after a
nature organization successfully submitted the application
moisture. A judge ruled that the impact
on the nearby nature was too great. The
Farmer Gunter Klaasen from Ravels wants support
Flemish environment ini ir (N-
aam environment minister Zuhal Demir (N-VA) for farmers who are supported by the Belgian PAS
did not announce a complete permit freeze, as agreed.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-schermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 A{T
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before mass protests against the nitrogen policy also arise in Flanders' - NRC
happened in the Netherlands in 2019 after a ruling Photo Nick Somers ta
of the Council of State, but demanded that new
agricultural permits could only be issued if there were zero extra
nitrogen emissions would occur.
The crocus chord
The revised version of the PAS, the so-called 'crocus agreement' of last February,
meant the end of a life's work for some farmers; 41 companies ended up
as 'peak loaders' on a red list and must close their businesses by 2025 at the latest. More
than a hundred orange farmers will be offered a way out with a buyout scheme. Mainly
the area where Gunter Klaasen lives and works is a nitrogen hotspot.
The new PAS also makes it virtually impossible for green companies like his
impossible to expand. The threshold for ammonia emissions is so low that almost all
farms will have to make either investments to reduce their emissions drastically
or significantly reduce the number of livestock before 2030.
For example, the number of pigs, almost 6 million in Flanders, must be increased by 30 by 2030
percent have been reduced.
Flanders is allocating 3.6 billion euros to finance the nitrogen dossier. In the Netherlands,
three times as large, that is 25 billion. The big difference between the two nitrogen agreements
according to David De Pue, researcher at the Flemish Institute for Agriculture, Fisheries
and Nutrition Research, that in the Netherlands 'thinking is area-oriented, instead of
per company". De Pue immediately sees that the Netherlands also affects the soil and groundwater quality
wants to tackle. That will come later in Flanders.
In April there was a commotion even in the Flemish parliament, when it turned out that there were companies
had ended up on the red list that were not yet red in 2015. Especially from the
impending closure of the centuries-old Abbey of Averbode, which was closed in 2015
was given a permit to expand, there was disgrace in the Flemish media. Er
errors may have been made in determining the reference year.
Emotional scenes
But Minister Demir refused to tamper with the agreement. She went for the past few weeks
in discussions with Flemish farmers. That led to two weeks ago
emotional scenes in Merksplas. Hundreds of farmers informed her that the
uncertainty about the PAS is becoming unbearable for them. To one of the
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-schermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 5/7
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before mass protests against the nitrogen policy also arise in Flanders' - NRC
tractors they had come with had a noose attached with her name on it.
Since then, the minister has had permanent police protection.
Until June 17, all Flemish people could participate
of a public inquiry via the municipalities
object to the PAS. Thousands did
that. But the question is whether there are any objections
something is done. Demir wants the PAS in the
will be translated into law in the autumn. In the Netherlands
does not have to be determined before July next year
the provinces want to reduce their nitrogen emissions
reducing.
Chicken farmer Gunter is located by the Flemish PAS
Klaasen with his back against the wall. When he's in his
two older stables require investment
He will have to limit ammonia emissions
expand to get out of debt. And that
can not. He is at his wits' end. Made last year
he was hit to death when he fell from a meter high
Devreese.
ladder fell. With a hollow look: “I also had mine
Photo Nick Somers ta
could break your neck. Then I was done with it
been"
Klaasen took part in the Dutch farmers' protest in Stroe last Wednesday. In
Early in the morning he and eight colleagues drove to Gelderland by tractor. He thought that was his
duty. Along the way, except for one middle finger, he only encountered people clapping,
he says. He bursts into tears when he thinks back to “Dutch collegiality”. "In
In Flanders, we do not yet realize what lies ahead of us. In the Netherlands yes” He
thinks this is due to the BoerCurgerMovement and "more objective media". In Flanders
according to him, the farmer is portrayed as the main culprit. If he does this in advance
If he had known, he would never have become a farmer seven years ago.
Klaasen has recently joined a steering group with which he prepares protest actions. He has
I now have regular contact with members of Farmers Defense by email and telephone
Force. He assures: it is only a matter of time before this also happens in Flanders
massive protests against nitrogen policy.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-schermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 6/7
 12/5/22, 12:43 PM 'A matter of time before mass protests against the nitrogen policy also arise in Flanders' - NRC
A version of this article also appeared in the June 30, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/06/29/als-mijn-weiland-schermd-gebied-wordt-valt-alles-in-duigen-a4134986 7IT
