12/5/22, 12:38 PM If the farmer stops, FrieslandCampina can expand its factory - NRC
9th
 
that elements are missing from this print version.
If the farmer stops, he can
FrieslandCampina
expand factory
Nitrogen emissions How do you expand a factory in a region with
heavy nitrogen load? FrieslandCampina bought emission rights
of fifteen farmers.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/18/als-de-boer-stopt-kan-frieslandcampina-uitbreiden-a4145588 1/5
 12/5/22, 12:38 PM If the farmer stops, FrieslandCampina can expand its factory - NRC
Through intermediaries, FrieslandCampina purchased 27 tons of emissions space from fifteen farmers in North
Brabant. This is allowed by law, but there is also criticism.
Photo Koen van Weel/ANP ta
He never expected to do business with FrieslandCampina in this way. Lambert
de Bruin (60), dairy farmer, had been a member of the dairy cooperative for years and knew it
Good. But that, in addition to milk, he would one day sell his 'nitrogen space' to the group,
he had not foreseen. “We are very fond of them, so in that respect it is not
terribly."
FrieslandCampina announced this month that it has acquired enough nitrogen space
have raised funds for the expansion of its dairy factory in Veghel, Brabant.
For this purpose, the company purchased, through intermediaries, 27 tons of emission space from fifteen
farmers, who are stopping their businesses in all corners of the province.
The transaction is a remarkable example of the vibrant trade in nitrogen rights.
Finding the necessary nitrogen space required FrieslandCampina to be complex
calculations and months of searching for suitable farms. This included calculations
the group knows exactly which nature reserves would suffer from the
emissions from the new factory.
The agreement between the company and the farmers is in order according to the law, but in practice
Nitrogen trading can count on resistance. The agricultural world is afraid of shrinkage,
because nitrogen space flows to other industries. And experts fear that
In the current tight nitrogen market, only parties with money can realize projects.
They are also critical that, while nitrogen emissions are still far too high, the space available
companies that close down are reused.
The agricultural world is afraid of shrinkage because of nitrogen space
flows to other industries
It does not say how much FrieslandCampina paid the farmers. On websites like
ammoniarechten.nl offer intermediaries nitrogen space for 5 to 500 euros per
kilos. Prices vary by region. The closer to a vulnerable nature reserve, the better
higher the price.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/18/als-de-boer-stopt-kan-frieslandcampina-uitbreiden-a4145588 2/5
 12/5/22, 12:38 PM If the farmer stops, FrieslandCampina can expand its factory - NRC
For De Bruin, who has now gotten rid of his cows and is focusing on arable farming (on
same place in Reek in Brabant), the yield is disappointing. Laughing: “I can do one
buy a new car, but it has little use in terms of investment in my new one
arable farm” After decades among the cows, it was time for something
less strenuous” profession, he says.
Affected region
The factory that FrieslandCampina is expanding makes medical food based on
caseinates: proteins from fresh milk. Demand for it is rising worldwide, it said
dairy company. But the expansion also increases the factory's nitrogen emissions.
Developing new business activities in the southeast of North Brabant is certainly possible
complicated. The region is one of the most nitrogen-affected areas of
The Netherlands, especially because of the many pig farms - worth around five million
pigs. And while the province must halve its nitrogen emissions by 2030
have from the government.
FrieslandCampina approached FrieslandCampina for more than a year and a half in search of a solution
ago agricultural consultancy firm DLV Advies. This links sellers of nitrogen space
to parties looking for this space. Farmers regularly report to DLV Advies
are considering quitting, who want to quit or who have recently ended their business and
hope to make some money from the sale of their nitrogen rights.
Jacob Sleutels (54) from Heusden, municipality of Asten, is now a dairy farmer
retired and just wants to keep some horses. The dairy farm he finished third
generation, could no longer manage with ninety cows. The expansion of the near
nature reserve would also force him to keep even fewer cows. That's why I did
he takes the animals out. “They have been gone for two years now, and I still miss them every day.”
he sold nitrogen space to FrieslandCampina.
Read more about trading in nitrogen rights:
For sale: farmers offer thousands of kilos online
nitrogen space
Bringing together the demand for nitrogen space and its supply is complicated.
Expansion of the FrieslandCampina factory would “reduce nitrogen emissions to all
wind directions”, says Jos de Groot, who at DLV Advies, explains the similarities
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/18/als-de-boer-stopt-kan-frieslandcampina-uitbreiden-a4145588 3/5
 12/5/22, 12:38 PM If the farmer stops, FrieslandCampina can expand its factory - NRC
arranged with the farmers. That required a lot of puzzling. Where are suitable farmers located?
where do their emissions fall?
Striking: De Groot advised FrieslandCampina to buy more space than in theory
required. The case law surrounding nitrogen trade is constantly changing and is
extremely complex; Several lawsuits are ongoing regarding this legislation. Possibly
There will soon be a rule in court that will also have to be taken into account
with nitrogen that precipitates further than 25 kilometers from the emitter. Therefore
FrieslandCampina bought extra space. De Groot: “We said: it is good to quit
to play it safe”
ed
Some make easy money with this trade. That
does not make reducing emissions any easier
Vulnerable nature
The nitrogen trade in which FrieslandCampina participated is the only way to do this
companies to expand in areas with high nitrogen loads. But there is also
a different direction, NRC wrote earlier.
Stopping farmers sell rights that they usually received for free when they started their business
apply for a permit. Anyone who now lives in an area with a high demand for those rights
very good. Experts consider it legally questionable that the space released
does not go to vulnerable nature.
“It is clear that some people make easy money from this trade. That makes
reducing emissions is not easier,” says Raoul Beunen, university
senior lecturer at the Open University and expert in nitrogen policy. He says you can
The law should also be read as meaning that all nitrogen space released must go to nature, for as long as possible
it is in poor condition.
Beunen points out that nitrogen deposition on nature reserves is also possible in theory
increase. For example, at some farms where space is being taken over, the
cows have been away for some time. And then there is the chance that parties with the deepest pockets will be there
run off with the nitrogen space.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/18/als-de-boer-stopt-kan-frieslandcampina-uitbreiden-a4145588 4/5
 12/5/22, 12:38 PM If the farmer stops, FrieslandCampina can expand its factory - NRC
In the agricultural sector, the 'loss' of nitrogen space to other sectors is sensitive.
Mark van den Oever, leader of the militant farmers' group Farmers Defense Force,
already called farmers who sell nitrogen space to other sectors “Judas” and
“weak links”.
According to Jos de Groot of DLV Advies, the idea that the 'deepest pockets' win is not valid
completely gone. “I currently have more nitrogen supply than demand.”
According to FrieslandCampina, buying up nitrogen rights “is only an option
image when there are no other options left.” The company points out that there is only
rights 'already offered on the market by
farmers". “Of course we want the ammonia emissions released during this production
structural reduction. But it will take several years to find the best solution for this
determine and implement”
A version of this article also appeared in the October 19, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/10/18/als-de-boer-stopt-kan-frieslandcampina-uitbreiden-a4145588 5/5
