= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
REPORTING
The 'nitrogen lock' also hinders this project
for cleaner water in North Brabant
Permit freeze To prevent nitrogen emissions, projects were in
North Brabant shut down. Also those that benefit nature, such as improvements
of the water purification in Oijen. “How Romantic do you have to be?”
Denise Retera September 18, 2023 Reading time 5 minutes
Listening Reading list A
 nnn!
zn and IT elken In
and gn SE | gens
and ef... >
me es
Ei MN and —
np no
=
men
Ak
 
am” _ p Fk es,
Where sand parts
yes can be seen
sink.
in Oij
Le In Oijen.
The sewage treatment plant
purification plant
Photo Merlin Daleman
 Step three: the sandless water ends up in a large container with all kinds of channels,
through which it flows. This is the heart of water purification. Here are the
ideal conditions are created for bacteria to absorb certain waste products
to eat. The water then goes to one of the basins on the site where the
bacteria sink to the bottom. The purified water flows from there
ditches and streams.
Peter Verlaan and Suzanne de Zoeten - director and director respectively
(Water Natural) at the Aa en Maas water board - show it all at the
sewage treatment plant in Oijen (municipality of Oss) in Brabant. Why so many
seagulls bathe enthusiastically in the basins, they say they don't know. Leave
points past a line of flying seagulls to a gray silo at the back of the
terrain. Last March, (now outgoing) Minister Mark Harbers opened the event
(Infrastructure and Water Management, VVD) this installation. “Norit is in there, the
diarrhea inhibitor. We add it to the water; medicine residues bind
on it.' In this way, the water is largely purified of these residues.
Building that installation was the first step of a major renovation of the
water purification in Oijen. The water board has not yet come much further
renovation, because it was almost completely shut down last March due to...
the 'nitrogen lock' on North Brabant. The province immediately did not provide any
more permits for projects involving nitrogen deposition on Natura 2000
areas. New figures showed that things were going so badly for the Brabant team
nature that action had to be taken.
 Also read
Sighing when nitrogen is discussed on the
Brabant dialogue meeting
The temporary permit freeze still applies at this time. And for all kinds
types of projects, such as housing, road construction, building
factories. It is not known how many projects cannot continue for the time being.
When the province imposed the stop in March, there were, according to a spokesperson
more than a hundred current applications that were rejected due to the nitrogen lock.
In the coalition agreement that the new provincial government started at the beginning of this month
presented, outlines how Brabant can get out of lockdown again.
But there is no quick solution.
In the meantime, projects that do cause nitrogen emissions are also at a standstill
which should ultimately help nature and the environment. This also applies to the renovation of the
water purification in Oijen. Additional technical rooms need to be built and
the spaghetti of cables and pipes underground must be replaced.
All to modernize the purification process and thus make the water even cleaner
to make. “Measuring is knowing,” says Verlaan. He means: because you are with that new one
techniques can measure more precisely what is in the wastewater, you can do better
purify.
“If this project remains idle for too long, we will achieve our targets for the Framework Directive
Don't water,” says Verlaan. This European directive prescribes what quality the
 Dutch waters by 2027. The Aa and Maas water board is also necessary
to contribute. “The wastewater does not have to become drinking water,” says De
Sweeten, “but it must be very clean, so that the surface water can...
desired high ecological quality.”
Also read
Lieke (25) would like to take over the farm,
but what happens with the stable deadline?
Netting
“Well, look how many people are working here: hardly anyone,” says
Leave. He points to a large, white construction trailer. “There is hardly anyone there
more in." Verlaan and De Zoeten both wear a pink construction helmet and orange
safety vest, because there is still a little bit of work to be done on the site. Er
there are a few excavators and here and there the ground is open. “If it's below
'management and maintenance' falls, then it can continue,' says Verlaan lightly
mockingly, “but if I make a foundation and a small house [for the technical
space] masonry, it is not allowed. Then the question is: how Roman should you be?”
The costs of shutting down the project are already "in the several millions",
according to Verlaan. These costs include, for example, the storage of ordered items
building materials and construction workers who were already scheduled and who the contractor
couldn't move on to another project so quickly. The longer it sits still, the higher it is
 amount. “All public money.” The project would be completed with electric construction equipment
can be resumed, but that is still only available to a very limited extent and is not possible
be used for all necessary work.
Deputy Hagar Rotjackers (Nature and Environment, Groenlinks) mentions it to the
telephone "very" that the renovation of the water treatment plant in Oijen cannot go ahead
through the nitrogen lock. “But we think everything is bad. The cessation of housing construction,
energy transition: also bad. We do not discriminate within 'very'. Brabant has to go
development.”
Photo Mertin Daieman
According to Rotjackers, who was also in the previous provincial council, Brabant had
last March had no choice but to impose the permit freeze. "We are
obliged to check permit applications against the latest scientific evidence
insights. And from then on, those insights turned out badly for Brabant
nature goal analyses. All provinces had to submit these analyzes last spring
direct the government. They serve as input for the nitrogen measures in each province.
 Roijackers emphasizes that 'internal netting' is still possible. That's what you have
no nature permit required. You then have to calculate the nitrogen emissions of the project
can compensate at your own location, for example by switching off the gas.
'Stable deadline'
The precise measures to unlock Brabant have yet to be determined
be worked out, says Roijackers. From the coalition agreement of the new
provincial government (VVD, GroenLinks, PvdA, SP, D66 and Lokaal Brabant) appears
in any case, that the province is strongly committed to strengthening the Natura 2000
areas. And the 'stable deadline' is still her hobbyhorse. That's the date -
mid 2024 for pig stables and January 1, 2026 for cattle stables - on which
Brabant livestock farmers must have made their stables 'low-emission' with
special housing systems (but for example organic farming or downsizing is allowed
also). There has been a lot of dissatisfaction among farmers about this for years, partly because the province
This anticipates the national nitrogen policy.
How long will it take before Brabant is unlocked? “This is still unexplored
terrain, so I cannot link a timetable to it,” says Roijackers. “It will in any case
case by area. Some lawyers and administrators say that the
licensing in an area may only be restarted when all
measures have been implemented there and others say that it is allowed again if it is
package of measures has been fully established. The first seems too late to me and it
second seems too early to me,"
 Just a little less strict
According to a spokesperson for the Interprovincial Consultation (IPO), Brabant is the
the only Dutch province that has declared an official licensing freeze.
“But the space for permits is also very limited in other provinces
in daily practice it often comes down to the same thing as in Brabant”
That other provinces have not formalized it as Brabant does
perhaps because some want to retain the option of external netting,
says the spokesperson. External netting is the taking over of nitrogen space
a company that stops. But in Drenthe, for example, where the nature objective analyzes are there
cok looked bad, since then it can no longer be offset externally, late
that province to NRC.
 The renovation of the water purification plant at Oijen in Brabant is largely at a standstill.
photo Merfin Daleman
 There is hope for the project in Oijen. “It seems to work out for the permit
can still be pulled off smoothly,” says De Zoeten. That is not because it is Brabant
the provincial government makes an exception, but because Oijen is against the border with
Gelderland is located on Gelderland and part of the nitrogen is therefore on Gelderland nature reserves
precipitates. “They are slightly less strict there. And recently it has become clear that
we may apply the Gelderland policy line for the Gelderland areas,” says
Leave. The small amount of nitrogen precipitation on Brabant's nature compensates
the water board, among other things, by disconnecting the offices from gas. The Sweets:
“But I do hope that there will soon be a structural solution for similar problems
important projects.”
Also read
Peasant resistance brewed in Brabant for five years
ago, what has been done there since?
A version of this article also appeared in the September 19, 2023 newspaper.
Share <6 Email the editor
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
 Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest one
milk
21 hours ago
About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Hire an Editorial Team Mediahuis NRC
Working with a subscription Opinion editor NRC Carrière
Copyright Login The ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create account Colophon NRC Readers Fund
Terms of delivery Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My reading list Customer service
Our app My subscriptions Family messages
Archive Service & delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) E
