  Î en et oe Sen [ 8 SO MMy news | d IR Potcasts Digital Kran Q vj PPE UTD Eenar Ger arte À | | % kk « fet Î PN AuenS PCO Sadee | rme je ee Photo Bram Petraeus ANALYSIS Chicken farmer, corncrake, goat path: in the nitrogen battle, every gram of emissions counts. Nitrogen crisis The nitrogen battle, in the absence of structural solutions, concerns small pieces of land. What if a stable in Flevoland emits just a little too much on paper for a possible habitat of an endangered bird further down the road? Rik Wassens, Wouter van Loon September 15, 2023 Reading time 18 minutes Listening Reading list A WHAT IS THE NEWS? The RIVM wants to get rid of the management of the Aerius calculation program, which is used to calculate the nitrogen load on nature reserves. The ministry is looking into whether Aerius can be transferred to another party, the ministry confirmed to NRC. The RIVM has difficulty with Aerius being used to implement policy, such as assessing permit applications. This conflicts with the "scientific task" of the RIVM. The two most obvious parties say that they would rather not adopt the program. BIJ12, the umbrella organization of provinces, prefers to leave everything as it is, and the Netherlands Enterprise Agency states that it does not have the expertise in-house. Before Jaap Verwolf enters his chicken stable, he always knocks on the door. “Those white chickens are easily startled. If you don't let them know you're coming, they'll sit at the back of the stable and you won't see any chickens anymore,” he explains as he steps into his stable. The chickens, a few weeks old, may have heard Verwolf coming, but they still fly over each other to flee. Verwolf has a rearing company with around 70,000 chickens. They arrive as day-old chicks and leave a few months later as laying hens, mainly to Germany. But 60,000 chickens are illegally in the stable - although the poultry farmer prefers not to call it that. His company is located a few kilometers above Lelystad on the Visvijverweg; a long road with only large farms. A nature reserve is nowhere to be found. All land was reclaimed from the sea in the mid-twentieth century and can be arranged entirely according to your wishes. Ideal for farmers who were displaced by growing cities and towns in the 1970s. But according to calculations by calculation tool Aerius, Verwolf's chickens cause an unacceptable increase in the nitrogen load on the Rhine Branches nature reserve, more than 20 kilometers away near Kampen. There is 800 square meters of grass meadow, in which a protected bird can breed, the corncrake. It concerns 0.22 mo of nitrogen per year, about three grams, a teaspoon. But even very small amounts are inadmissible because nature is in too poor condition. I wish I had taken action on that nature permit years ago, thinks Verwolf Now and then, but according to the province of Flevoland, a permit was not necessary at all. After all, there was plenty of room here in the Flevopolder. Giant Balsam The scent is unmistakable. Whether there are cows, chickens or pigs, anyone who walks into a stable immediately smells ammonia. It is a compound of nitrogen and hydrogen, originating from manure. Throw it on the land, and in no time blackberry bushes, nettles, cow parsley and giant balsam will sprout. Not every plant benefits. Sundew, orchids and heather only grow when they are not overgrown by nitrogen guzzlers. Animals that depend on nitrogen-sensitive plants as a habitat or food source are in dire straits. In the Netherlands it is difficult to limit nitrogen emissions. Consider: in a small area there are 17.5 million people, the largest seaport in Europe, a large airport, a huge transport sector, an extensive road network and a gigantic livestock herd. If there is space, it is preferable to fill it up as quickly as possible, also in the nitrogen file. And so the government wants to know exactly where nitrogen can and cannot be emitted. But how do you find out? Nitrogen is lighter than air - blow ammonia into a balloon, let it go and it rises. Think of a stable or factory as a place where hundreds of those balloons are released. Where do they land? Preferably not in nature reserves - but in residential areas, parking lots or meadows it is no problem. For years, the Netherlands made a simple estimate of the nitrogen load on nature with a 'distance table'. But wind direction, rain, the type of landscape, chemical processes in the air - it all influences where nitrogen ends up. With more details, the idea was, you can better map - and fill - the nitrogen space in the Netherlands. That thought still grips the Netherlands. As long as the government is unable to significantly reduce nitrogen emissions, the battle for space will continue with nitrogen calculations in hand. It leads to lengthy bureaucratic procedures that revolve around no more than a few grams, tenths of a mole per year. Twenty cows In 2017, Jaap Verwolf wants to expand his stables. He approaches the province of Flevoland with plans for a new chicken stable with the most modern techniques. Large conveyor belts run under the chicken coops that remove the manure a few times a week. That in turn reduces ammonia emissions. Verwolf is not the only one with plans. The entire Visvijverweg is being renovated. Neighbor Arend Heida, dairy farmer, also wants new stables. His father moved into the farm that is now his in the 1970s. Those stables need to be replaced, and he immediately wants to expand his company with twenty cows. The province used a new calculation tool for the first time to calculate the nitrogen load of livestock farmers, with incredibly detailed results: Aerius. The companies do not even need a permit, the province said in 2017, because their nitrogen load is so small. A 'notification' under the new PAS, the Nitrogen Approach Program, is sufficient. “I wanted a permit,” Verwolf says now, “but that was simply not possible. You really had no choice.” In 2015 there will be a brand new calculation model * around which the entire nitrogen approach will be built: Aerius. Nowhere in the world is nitrogen precipitation calculated in such detail as in the Netherlands. But Aerius can do more. There is not only an application to calculate permit applications, but also a function that calculates how many measures will yield. And one that shows how the nature reserves are doing. In effect, Aerius becomes the government's accounting program. The PAS nitrogen accounting works like a credit card: farmers and project developers can 'borrow' nitrogen, which will later be 'repaid' with measures such as removing soil with too much nitrogen in nature reserves, or less fertilization. In the PAS it is legally required to carry out a calculation with Aerius when applying for a permit. Wind direction, rain, the type of landscape, chemical processes in the air - it all influences where nitrogen ends up. Everyone is extremely enthusiastic: the system is so easy to use and yet so accurate. “We were handing out candy and ice cream at that time,” says Mark Wilmot, the inventor of Aerius. He works at engineering firm WING and in 2010 was seconded to the Ministry of Economic Affairs, which included agriculture at the time, to work on Aerius. Wilmot is proud when trade magazine De Boerderij nominates his invention in 2016 for the Computable Awards, the most important ICT prize in the Netherlands. The calculation tool wins in the Government category. Aerius seems to have achieved the impossible: farmers are happy and nature will also recover - in the long term. But in May 2019, PAS failed at the Council of State. The government issues all kinds of permits, but fails to actually reduce the nitrogen load. The judge determines that not an ounce of nitrogen may be added to nature until a significant reduction has been achieved. The nitrogen bank has been declared bankrupt. What remains is Aerius, a legally required system that calculates the nitrogen precipitation in detail, without room to spend. After the ruling of the Council of State, poultry farmer Jaap Verwolf still shrugs his shoulders. “Then we thought: everything will be fine. The minister promised again and again: the PAS reporters will be legalized because they have acted 'in good faith'," But without a permit, Verwolf cannot do anything: he cannot sell his company, he cannot expand it, he cannot get a loan from the bank. Without the PAS notification, he falls back on his previous permit, but it is so old that no one can find it anymore. Verwolf himself found an older Nuisance Act permit, with room for 10,000 chickens. “It is impossible to make money with that,” he says. Verwalf's discomfort grows when the ministry's promised solution does not materialize: nothing happens. Environmental organization Mobilization for the Environment (MOB) has forced the court to order that the province of Overijssel must take action against the PAS reporters - perhaps Flevoland will be next. Verwolf now decides to work on his permit. Only the 0.22 mole of nitrogen in the corncrake's habitat stands in the way. Dronten ld Á ij» Seven farmers on the Visvijverweg in Lelystad are largely illegal. After the Council of State scrapped the nitrogen policy in 2019, they have no permit to fall back on. One of them is poultry farmer Jaap Verwolf. His company can obtain a permit if his company does not have a negative effect on the nitrogen-sensitive nature within 25 kilometers of his company. The same goes for its neighbors. They are all required to make a calculation using the Aerius calculation program. If this shows that extra nitrogen is deposited in an (almost) overloaded area, it will be difficult to obtain a permit. There is not much nitrogen-sensitive nature reserve in the area. But in the Rhine Branches nature reserve, near Kampen, there is one piece of overloaded nature, just within a radius of 25 kilometers. There is approximately 800 square meters of land where crested grass can grow. This is nitrogen sensitive and is important for a protected bird: the corncrake. The contribution is not large. According to Aerius, 0.22 mol, approximately 3 grams, of nitrogen from Jaap Verwolf's chickens lands on this piece of nature reserve. Bottom line There are few farmers who would now want to nominate Aerius for a prize. They now make their own calculations to demonstrate that the figures from the program are incorrect and file lawsuits against the use of Aerius. The judge dismisses the farmers' objections. But there is also justified criticism of Aerius. An advice from a committee led by Leen Hordijk, emeritus professor of Environmental System Analysis, will be published in March 2020. He looked at Aerius at the request of the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality (LNV). The Hordijk committee concludes: Aerius's uncertainty margins are enormous*. That is not a problem if you want to know what the state of nature is at a national level: sometimes nitrogen precipitation will be a little more in practice, sometimes a little less, and so the bottom line estimate is quite reliable. But for a permit application, in which the nitrogen load of one company is calculated, the model is "unsuitable", says Hordijk. The average margin of uncertainty is 70 percent, at large distances 100 percent is not strange at all. This provides “a false sense of security,” says Hordijk. There is too great a chance that the permit application will be wrongly rejected - or granted. The cow farm of farmer Arend Heida. Photo Bram Petraeus The emeritus professor proposes a series of solutions. Until then, the nitrogen deposition of farmers on nature reserves throughout the country was calculated. After Hordijk's report, the ministry decided to limit this to a radius of 25 kilometers around a company. Another important piece of advice from Hordijk is to no longer rely on small areas of one hectare *. Choose a slightly larger area, he advises. Some ecologists are against this, because useful information is lost, says ecologist Roland Bobbink of B-WARE Research Center. Bobbink was part of several groups that advised the ministry about Aerius. Bobbink himself is in favor of Hordijk's proposal, but, he says, the level of detail has a function, "Dutch nature is simply fragmented. First, for example, you have a small fen of half a hectare, with a strip of wet heath around it. 50 meters and then a forest. I know of areas where there are already ten habitat types per square kilometer.” But counting on one hectare also makes more economic activity possible. Because if you count on larger areas, the most vulnerable nature will receive the most weight: the strictest nitrogen standard will then apply to the entire larger area, which also includes less vulnerable nature. Then even less is possible, warn the ministry and the RIVM, among others. Nothing has been done with Hordijk's proposal. Fussy bird Crex crex, the screeching call of the corncrake - often compared to a bank card rasping on a hair comb - is like its Latin species name. The males often sit near each other, in places where their collective screeching carries a distance, sometimes up to a kilometer. Females flying overhead are thus enticed to land. “The males let the females know: it is good here,” says corncrake expert Kees Koffijberg. Handy, because the corncrake is difficult to spot, says Koffijberg, monitoring network coordinator at bird expertise center SOVON and author of many studies on the bird. The corncrake, eight to thirty inches tall on remarkably long legs, barely emerges from the knee-high grassland where it prefers to nest during the breeding season. The grass should not be too dense, otherwise the corncrake will no longer be able to move through it. The species are counted on warm evenings in May by volunteers who visit possible settlement sites. The corncrake is rarely found in the Netherlands anymore, despite its protected status and ambitious goals. There should be about 160 in the Rhine branches, but last year SOVON had six there, and ninety in the country as a whole. There is plenty of suitable habitat, says Koffijberg. But the grassland may not be mowed during the long breeding season of the corncrake, between May and August. That is precisely what often goes wrong. If strict measures are not taken in the coming years, the species will no longer occur in the Netherlands, SOVON believes. Guess the piece of land that Verwolf's Aertus calculation is based on is in a potential corncrake habitat. In some places, crested grass could grow, where the corncrake sometimes breeds. But it is nitrogen sensitive, and the nature reserve is almost overloaded. Farmers or project developers who want to start a new project in the area must therefore make an Aerius calculation. It concerns approximately 800 square meters, located on a plot that dairy farmer Gijsbert van den Berg leases. His cows sometimes walk there, he fertilizes it and mows the grass. In the middle of the plot he plucks a few blades from the field near the roots. No crested grass, concludes Van den Berg. He points to the red base: “typical for perennial ryegrass.” Kamegras Making a card is a delicate job, little is as definitive as a line on paper. In the case of the maps in Aerius, it means the division between nitrogen-sensitive and non-nitrogen-sensitive. Between: something is possible here, and perhaps nothing is possible here. It is a task that lies in the hands of the provinces. They must make an inventory: where does which species possibly occur? Where does crested grass grow, where are juniper thickets, where can a lapwing or kingfisher nest? The province draws the lines. The area where crested grass can grow, but is not growing now. Photo Bram Petraeus Ecologists often go into the field to make maps of protected plants. But for protected animal species, the map is made on the basis of large databases - with data on tree height, soil type and groundwater level - and the Habitat Suitability Index, another calculation model *. This links the preferences of protected animal species to properties of the terrain and vegetation that may occur there. The nitrogen-sensitive parts are forwarded to Aerius, because nitrogen precipitation must be taken into account in those areas. The model certainly does not provide a perfect estimate of the animal species and plants present, acknowledges the province of Gelderland, as the 'pioneer' responsible for the Rhine Branches nature reserve. Anyone who discovers that a map is incorrect is invited to report it to the province. After the fall of the PAS and critical parliamentary questions, Gelderland sent ecologists for the first time in 2021 to check the maps with habitats of animal species. 75 percent of the areas visited ultimately turned out not to be nitrogen sensitive and were subsequently removed from Aerius. The error rate will be lower in the next round, the province emphasizes, because ecologists first visited areas with the greatest doubts. Escape route Agricultural advisor Sjaak Van Schaik clicks from behind his desk to open StreetSmart, software with aerial photographs and photos of the landscape around roads. He sees the patch of possible crested grass change over the years and quickly concludes: tractors drive over it. It is probably fertilized. “Regular agricultural use,” he notes in an ecological test. Van Schaik, who works at VanWestreenen consultancy firm, usually works for clients in the Veluwe. This often involves an excess of many parts on many hectares of nature, but in Jaap Verwolf's poultry farm it concerns a very small nitrogen contribution on one small piece. He immediately sees possibilities. As long as he can convincingly demonstrate that that little bit of nitrogen has no effect on the corncrake, the permit can still be granted. Nitrogen is "a very limited bottleneck" for the corncrake, Van Schaik argues. For the corncrake, management is much more important, for example no longer measuring the fields. That has to be done by the farmer who maintains the land. Verwolf's nitrogen emissions have no influence on this, Van Schaik writes. The province agrees, Verwolf receives a provisional permit. Van Schaik's ecological test also makes the province of Flevoland think. Verwolf's neighbors on Visvijverweg are also PAS detectors. And these must be legalized, the government instructed the provinces. So the neighbors soon receive an email from the province. Six bites in - they call in their own advisor, who copy Van Schaik's report word for word. They will submit their permit applications at the end of November. A few days later they receive good news: the province plans to grant them a permit. Of course, you can criticize Aerius, the ministry acknowledges. But, they say: there is also an ecological test, which can demonstrate that the calculated nitrogen load does not lead to deterioration of nature. That does not make an Aerius calculation a Solomonic judgement, based on the test a permit can still be granted if the Aertus calculation shows red numbers, Cok Verwolf thus received his permit. The escape route is difficult to pass. A permit applicant must arrange and pay for the assessment himself. This often concerns larger nature reserves, and ecologists have to analyze many hectares. That has to be paid out of your own pocket. It is no problem for large project developers or the government to hire those expensive consultants. This high price is more difficult to afford for individual livestock farmers. The ecological test is therefore rarely used, the ministry also admits when asked. Verwolf and his neighbors were lucky: because it was only one hectare, the costs were not too bad. Another problem: a consultant rarely presented an outcome that was unsuitable for his client. Raoul Beunen, associate professor of Environmental Policy at the Open University, sees this as a risk: “Provinces often do not have the capacity to look very critically at those ecological tests.” Environmental organization MOB, which initiated and often won a long series of lawsuits surrounding nitrogen policy, has therefore focused on the ecological test. They fear that in this way all kinds of small amounts of extra nitrogen deposition will eventually be allowed. Beunen: “I also think that is a risk. It is easy to reason about small amounts that are 'possible'. These can add up to large sums, which you also saw at PAS.” Single chamber At the end of August 2023, Jaap Verwolf will be in court for the first time in his life. The administrative judge of the single chamber in Lelystad is considering his company's permit, Verwolf himself is not a party. The State Attorney defends the granting of the permit on behalf of the province. On the other side is MOB, represented by counsel Stijn van Uffelen. He wants Verwolf's permit to be annulled. The case is no longer about the nitrogen from Verwolf's chickens. The focus is on the ecological test: is this sufficient to issue a permit, or should the province issue a 'positive refusal'? In that case, Verwolf's business is only legal as long as circumstances or policies do not change. That is the purpose of MOB, Van Uffelen explains to the judge. If farmers receive a permit with a high degree of legal certainty, it will be much more difficult for the government or province to take nitrogen measures. “There are thousands of companies that are in the same situation. If they receive a permit, an effective nitrogen policy will be very difficult.” MOB is now also pursuing cases against eight other livestock farmers in the province, including Verwolf's neighbors. Clenched buttocks Towards the end of every year, civil servants in afte provinces are left with clenched buttocks. It is the time that Aerius is updated, and everything can be different in one fell swoop. All new knowledge is processed annually in Aerius. Part of those changes are actually: will a farmer stop? Then its nitrogen emissions are removed from the calculations. Part of it consists of new insights: if better information comes from Germany about emission sources, this will have consequences for the calculations around the border. It leads to unpredictable fluctuations. Pieces of nature that are still under pressure one year can, without anything having changed in reality, be well below the nitrogen standard the next year. Nature where nothing seems to be wrong can be a problem a year later. This can have major consequences for a positive refusal: due to the update of Aerius, a farm may suddenly have an unacceptable nitrogen contribution. Something like this happened at the beginning of this year at the farmers of the Visvijverweg. After the Aerius update, the piece of nature on which the permits are located suddenly no longer has a nitrogen problem - the nitrogen load is less high than previously calculated. It is therefore no longer included in the Aerius calculation. But 3.8 kilometers further on, the nitrogen load increases by 106.3 mol in the new calculation. And that area is now in the danger zone. Nitrogen-sensitive hexagons @ Not overloaded @ (Almost) overloaded Kampen 250 m When the neighbors on Visvijverweg apply for a permit, it is all about the piece of nature west of Kampen. But on January 26, 2022, the nitrogen calculation model Aerius will be updated. All kinds of data sources are updated annually and the results are then processed in Aerius. The nitrogen deposition on the part of nature that first posed a problem decreased in the new calculation and is no longer relevant for granting permits. But a few kilometers further on, the calculated nitrogen deposition of a piece of nature increased by more than 100 moles. That part is now in the danger zone. But for some farmers, this piece of nature falls outside the calculation limit of 25 kilometers and does not count towards the granting of permits. For a moment, everything seems to start all over again: is a new report needed for that other part of nature? But after a site visit in February, the province ruled: the two nature reserves are similar, the old ecological test remains valid. It makes sense to update Aerius every year, says Wim van der Maas of the RIVM. “International treaties stipulate that we must recalculate all emissions every year.” This is where scientific precision collides with practicality, sees Aerius inventor Mark Wilmot. Aerius is often seen as one large scientific project in which monitoring the quality of nature and granting permits are closely linked, he says. The RIVM also sees it this way. “But in reality, Aerius consists of all kinds of separate programs that use the same computing heart,” says Wilmot. "You can develop those programs separately." The part that forms a national picture must comply with international treaties, but the part that is used to calculate a permit application does not. “Update the permit program every three years, which will provide a more stable policy,” says Wilmot. But the RÉVM does not want to make an exception. “We say: we update everything, no cherry picking,” says Van der Maas. Aerius is now part of a "government-wide reorganization" of IT. In any case, the RIVM wants to get rid of parts of Aerius, the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality confirms when asked. The institute has particular difficulty with the part that is used for licensing. The ministry is investigating which organization can best take on the management of Aerius. After the update of Aerius, another piece of nature became relevant. Sometimes sheep walk there. Photo Bram Petraeus “We certainly laughed about it sometimes,” says Verwolf at the kitchen table of neighbor Arend Heida. “A small amount of nitrogen in an area the size of a garden. What is it actually about” Heida couldn't hold back his laughter when he heard that the corncrake had been heard in the area a few years ago. “He was just sitting here, under our cloud of nitrogen.” The lawsuit will take years, Verwolf also realizes that. Probably up to the Council of State. “It is not yet at the point where I say: I will put a sign in the garden and emigrate,” says Verwolf. “But if that permit doesn't come, it will be over soon.” Goat paths How much time can it take in a case for three grams? How many magistrates, civil servants, consultancy firms and lawyers have to deal with this? There is also discomfort at the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality about such matters, but there is no alternative, it sounds. Aerius, says the ministry, is simply the best we have. Nitrogen professor Jan Willem Erisman thinks the battle for grams of nitrogen is a waste of energy. “We put more effort into goat paths and legal constructs than real solutions,” he says. Aerius's strict test therefore remains necessary, he says, as a stick behind the door. "Only when the nitrogen tax is structurally reduced will anything be possible again." Stijn van Uffelen of MOB would also prefer to spend his time differently, "I would rather work with the government on policy to reduce nitrogen, but real solutions are not negotiable there." .” The plans of outgoing Prime Minister Mark Rutte (VVD) to "accelerate" the nitrogen policy are at risk now that his cabinet has fallen. While farmers, provinces and environmental activists compete for a teaspoon of nitrogen, an average of about 550 moles of nitrogen is still found on one hectare of overloaded nature reserves. Ecologist Roland Bobbink summarizes: “We invest a lot of time in a small amount of nitrogen deposition on one hectare. But we are not doing what is much more needed: nitrogen emissions must be reduced quickly.” NITROGEN For years, the Netherlands has been emitting more nitrogen than nature can tolerate. To reduce emissions, the government is focusing on 'peak emitters' - nitrogen emitters whose emissions end up in vulnerable natural areas. Many of these so-called peak loaders are livestock farms — these companies are often located close to vulnerable nature. What are the prospects for livestock farmers in the Netherlands? And will they cooperate with the nitrogen approach? NRC explores the nitrogen problem and the prospects for agriculture. View the overview A version of this article also appeared in the newspaper of September 16, 2023. Share Email the editor My NRC NRC Websites About NRC Contact nic) Take a Media House NRC Editorial About us Working at Opinion Editorial NRC Career subscription Log in NRC Webshop Copyright The ombudsman NRC Readers Fund Create an account Colophon Privacy Terms of Delivery Digital newspaper AdSales My reading list Customer service NRC Code My subscriptions Family messages Our app Archive Service & delivery Advertising Newsletters NN W f ©) EH
