= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
BACKGROUND
Nature also belongs to the saddle locust —
so people should stay home more often
Too busy Nature is bothered by people far too much, says Natuurmonumenten.
Professional photo shoot, boot camp? Apply and pay six weeks in advance
50 euros.
Ingmar Vriesema Of February 2024 Reading time
3 minutes
 
Listening Reading list A
 /
vs
 
a
A
 
Dn
 
r
The
 
ears
 
1
 
rt
Of
”
PPT
 
is
 
 
PI
sea
 
 
SAT
jeg
 
 
and
Dn
 
there
 
_
 
And
 
48.1AAEZE
len
 
7OU BEE SEA
 
7
EENAD AE,
wt
 
 
NN
 
ON
EP
from
 
s
 
ef
 
p
 
Tb
(ON K Zip
and there PN
d
» oves
“hs
itn iva
k (alauda arvensis) must
ri
field lion
AIURIEKiational park Veluwezoom.
ek. The saddle grasshopper
Photo Dieuwertje Bravenboer
 ephippiger) has all but disappeared on the heath edge. The yellowhammer (emberiza
citrinella) loves that grasshopper and finds the dog in the pot.
But, it must be said: one population thrives exceptionally well in Veluwezoom.
Man (homo sapiens) enters the forbidden several times a day
rest areas, as recorded by wildlife cameras equipped with infrared. They walk or
cycle around with lost eyes. Or they look alert and wear a
camouflage suit and a camera with a telephoto lens around their neck. Sportier ones
leave so many power bar wrappers behind that they fill the ranger's jacket pocket
is overflowing at the end of his week. They sweat on gravel bikes, meditate in groups,
trying to spot game before the sun rises. Soramigen do their business, you know
the Forester. It takes him little effort to track down a big one
human message.
Maximum three dogs
Enough is enough!, the Natuurmonumenten association recently stated: we are sharpening
the rules for recreation and commerce! Not only in Veluwezoom, but everywhere
our 10 thousand hectares of nature. The Wormer and Jisperveld, the Lower
Dinkeldal, the Schiermonnikoog National Park, the Schinveldse Bossen: everywhere
nature is under pressure. Professional photo shoot of a bridal couple? Ask
six weeks in advance, Cost: 50 euros, and the forester decides whether it is allowed.
Scatter ashes? Unfortunately, this is no longer allowed anywhere, you teach boot camp, shinrin-yoku or
 other paid recreation? Not without permission. Application fee: 50 euros.
Let the dogs out? Maximum three dogs per supervisor.
Sorry, this really has to be done, says Natuurmonumenten. All those dogs chase the pigs,
scaring badgers, breeding birds and people. The ashes of your loved one are
bad for the most vulnerable nature. And professional photographers? We want
just discourage anything happening in nature.
Enforcement will be a test, with one boa per 17
square kilometers
The question is how hot the soup is eaten. For the dog walkers, those
see their business model collapse, there is a 'transition period' in places until
2025. Moreover, enforcement of the new rules is an ordeal: the
The association employs 65 forest rangers with boa powers. That's the bottom line
at one boa per 17 square kilometers. “Playing police is not our goal,” says
spokesperson Naomi Persoon. Nevertheless: fines are certainly not excluded.
Sports clubs, professional photographers and other visitors who wrongly do not
asking permission risks a fine of at least 110 euros.
And yes, says Natuurmonumenten, the rules are strict, but don't forget: they apply
have always been conditions for visiting our nature. You were already allowed to explore nature at night
 never in, you were not allowed to leave the paths, scatter ashes or walk dogs
already subject to strict rules. An organization such as Staatsbosbeheer also has numerous
of rules,
And yet. Natuurmonumenten is such a big boy and the regulations are such
sharpened, that landscape and wedding photographer Nando Harmsen from Helmond
started to find out for the first time “which nature actually belonged to whom”. Areas of
He will “certainly” avoid natural monuments, he says. One six weeks in advance
submit request: didn't see him. Man, he always followed the rules
held. Never deviates from the paths, respects nature. “There are always rotten ones
apples. A few individuals ruining nature. But Natuurmonumenten
now punishes everyone.”
Close the eyes
Marit Hendriksen of the Haarlem dog walking service Dog Doc fears this
the survival of her profession. She walks with six dogs, fellow
services sometimes with fifteen. A maximum of three is hardly profitable, she says,
unless you increase the price enormously. Not everyone can afford that.
What about the elderly with little money who have a dog for company
but can no longer walk for long?
No misunderstanding: Marit Hendriksen understands Natuurmonumenten. The
pressure on nature is too high. But where should we go? Hendriksen already knocked
to her municipality in 2016, hoping for an alternative location. In vain,
 she says, While: the Haarlem scouting associations, are there no opportunities there? "That
have large areas and I think they only use them on Saturdays.”
Photo Dieuwertje Bravenboer
Owner Beitske Bouwman of the Anaya Academy introduces people to shinrin-yoku
experience that they are part of nature, so she lets them close their eyes,
slowly, after which they discover and learn consciousness in their bodies
to sense that the tree nearby has just as much substantial matter. We are the
nature, Bouwman teaches. And then it doesn't help that that beneficial, holistic one
nature suddenly turns out to be the domain of an association with house rules. Strict
house rules.
Really, she understands that Natuurmonumenten has to do things, it's annoying
people flout the rules. But is paying 50 euros
application fees the solution? How great would it be if Natuurmonumenten did that
euros would invest in education? That people will realize that they coincide
with nature? “Because that realization,” she says, “we have lost as a society.”
 Forest ranger in Veluwezoom Ruben Vermeer can follow that reasoning: yes, we are
nature. Or as he often hears people say: 'nature belongs to everyone',
Absolute. But doesn't that mean, he says, that nature also enjoys nature?
yellowhammer, the mistle thrush and the oh-so-beautifully singing woodlark?
A version of this article also appeared in the February 10, 2024 newspaper.
Share <6 Email the editor
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest one
milk
21 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
