= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
BACKGROUND
The government's nitrogen approach leads
hardly any more 'healthy' nature reserve
Unhealthy nature Measures such as buying out peak loaders help to prevent
nitrogen, but the share of overloaded nature areas is changing
barely through.
Eppo König February 28, 2024 Reading time 3 minutes
Listening Reading list A
 P
2030 to enough in just 1 percentage point of the Natura 2000 areas
. . . . . Photo Robin Utrecht / ANP
improvement. The decrease in nitrogen precipitation in these vulnerable nature reserves
 will largely be due to cleaner industry and cleaner
traffic in neighboring countries.
These are conclusions from the first evaluation of the nitrogen approach by the
Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL), the National Institute for Public Health
and Environment (RIVM) and Wageningen University. Co-author Henk van Zeijts of the
PBL called the nitrogen results “none” during a press conference on Wednesday
cheerful message” and “not very stimulating”. “There really is a lot of work to be done
store,” says Van Zeiits.
Cannot be measured properly
A remarkable conclusion is that the effect of recent nature measures
is actually difficult to follow. The data from provinces is often 'not available
and/or not usable,” the report states. And there is “no coherent overview
available of the measures in the Natura 2000 areas and their effects”,
Van Zeijts: “It is a disturbing observation that the information provision
is so fragmented”
This report is mainly about the specific effects of nitrogen measures, says
the PBL, and specific statements can be made about this.
Nitrogen emissions from agriculture (ammonia), industry and traffic
(nitrogen oxides) affects the soil and puts pressure on animal and plant species.
 The exceedance of the nitrogen standard has been decreasing for years, but is still too high
approximately 70 percent of the more than 160 protected Natura 2000 areas. It
share of vulnerable areas under that nitrogen standard (KDW) must increase to
at least 40 percent in 2025, 50 percent in 2035 and 74 percent in 2035.
Those legal goals will be unattainable within ten years, it became apparent earlier this week
from a report. Between 2021 and 2030, the share of 'healthy' nature reserves will increase
hardly increase. From 28 to 31 percent (instead of the intended 40
percent), is the expectation. This means that only 1 percentage point of improvement is possible
attribute to the effect of the Dutch nitrogen measures.
Peasant protest
The fact that the nitrogen targets have fallen further out of reach is partly because
the nitrogen standard or KDW itself has been tightened. It's also because the
The nitrogen approach has been bogged down in political discussion and farmers' protests: some of it
of the measures have not yet been developed into regulations and subsidies. And the
nitrogen is decreasing, but remains well above the standard in many nature reserves,
which means that the percentage of 'healthy' areas hardly increases.
The knowledge institutes have investigated the effect of various
measures that have already been taken. This is the speed limit on highways
reduced from 130 to 100 kilometers per hour, and more money came for it
ending pig farms and cleaner technical innovation. There came
 schemes for buying out farmers and large nitrogen emitters, the
peak loads, with a total of almost 1,290 applications received.
The good news is that the exceedance of nitrogen deposition in Natura
2000 areas will decline by a third by 2030. But that's only for 25
percent is due to the government's Dutch nitrogen approach. It
most of the expected dating (45 percent) comes from cleaner
economic policy in, for example, Germany, Belgium and France - and is uncertain,
The remaining 30 percent is due to other policies, such as the elimination of the
broader manure standards for the Netherlands.
3,000 jobs
The nitrogen approach also has economic and social implications
consequences, the researchers describe. As a result of the buyout arrangements,
employment in livestock farming is expected to decline by 3,000
jobs (6 to 7 percent). Both among farmers and among
The nitrogen approach has led to a lot of distrust in the government among nature conservationists
led.
Furthermore, the nitrogen approach has not led to easier solutions
licensing for companies. For the group of PAS reporters, victims
farmers who are waiting for a nature permit to be able to farm legally
still no solution. Housing construction has not been 'locked down', as was reported
 feared, but major infrastructure projects are largely at a standstill
the lingering nitrogen problem.
The government can improve the nitrogen approach with still underutilized resources
measures, the researchers advise. Reducing protein in the ration
of dairy cattle, for example, leads to less ammonia in their feces. A
sustainable business operations and technical innovation such as cleaner stables
can also help. The industry and transport sector will also have to be cleaner
become smaller, but their share in the nitrogen problem is smaller.
Another piece of advice, as shown by the research, is that politics and administration are realistic
must formulate ambitions for the long-term approach to nitrogen. Van Zeijts: “You
you don't have to want everything everywhere. That doesn't work either. That is purely from a technical point of view
annoying."
A version of this article also appeared in the February 29, 2024 newspaper.
Share 9% Email the editor
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
 Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest one
milk
21 hours ago
About NRC My NRC Contact NRC Websites
About us Hire an Editorial Team Mediahuis NRC
Working with a subscription Opinion editor NRC Carrière
Copyright Login The ombudsman NRC Webshop
Privacy Create account Colophon NRC Readers Fund
Terms of delivery Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My reading list Customer service
Our app My subscriptions Family messages
Archive Service & delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©)
