= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
COMMENTARY
By choosing to postpone, Brussels proves that
farmers no service
Brake on greening
February 8, 2024 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening 1) Reading List U
This is NRC's daily commentary. It contains opinions, interpretations and choices.
They are written by a group of editors, selected by the
chief editor. In the comments, NRC shows what it stands for. Comments
offer the reader a handle, an angle, it is 'first aid' for the news of the
day.
he necessary greening of European agriculture is this week
struck another blow. Last week, when farmers during a
EU summit to set the streets of Brussels on fire, decided the
European Commission already to reverse unpopular measures, among other things
 in the field of nature conservation. Tuesday was another big knee jerk
done, which will prolong the reduction of pesticides in agriculture
to last. Concrete objectives for emission reduction in agriculture appear
moreover, have been removed from new climate plans.
Also read
With trembling knees, Brussels presents one
new climate goal
It raises the question of whether the committee will still succeed in doing what it sets out to do
earth is: acting in the European interest. Commission Chairman Von der Leyen
seems with her head rather at the European elections in June, and with her
European People's Party (EPP). The European Christian Democrats see themselves as
guardians of farmers' interests, but polls do not provide sufficient certainty
they can retain that role, through the rise of the radical right and new ones
(farmer) parties. And so it rains concessions, while the current European
agricultural policy really needs to be overhauled. Nowhere is this clearer than in
The Netherlands, where industrial, intensive livestock farming in particular places a heavy burden on the
society and causes a chain reaction of problems. The
Nitrogen problems lead to problems in construction, at a time of great concern
housing shortage. The pollution of water and soil makes the Netherlands less liveable.
A popular analysis is: the agricultural reforms in the Green Deal are not
realistic, and that is why it is good that the ambitions are lowered somewhat. But someday
 those ambitions were more realistic. Endless procrastination makes them unrealistic
become. The Netherlands itself has not had complete manure rules that have existed for years
want to implement, which means that the problems and the solutions are now much greater
indeed much more radical. Member of Parliament and former dairy farmer Harm Holman (NSC)
had the courage last week to argue for a smaller livestock herd, because this
According to him, it can solve a lot of other problems. An analysis that is correct
a bus, but which immediately caused him serious threats. Well-intentioned
farmers who are willing to think about solutions deserve everything
support. That happens far too little, and unfortunately Von der Leyen now gives the bad
example, by listening too much to farmers blocking highways and a
to choose a path that has proven to be a dead end for the Netherlands: that of postponement.
Also read
The tractors also appear in Brussels
the green plans disappear
Last week, a rule was shelved to promote biodiversity:
farmers would be obliged this year - for the first time, after an earlier postponement - at 4
percent of their agricultural land fallow. Von der moved on Tuesday
Leyen returned a complete bill that would halve the use of
pesticides should have led. An unusual step: the Commission
almost never withdraws proposals for the sake of the possibility of further ones
keep negotiations open.
 That road is now closed, despite overwhelming evidence that pesticides
can be harmful, not least for farmers themselves. Von der Leyen
defends the decision with the argument that the pesticides law, which was already passed in November
was rejected by the European Parliament, only fueling polarization
works. However, what the EU boss has mainly shown is that polarization pays off, and that
achieves the desired result with roadblocks, arson and pitchforks
can become.
A version of this article also appeared in the February 8, 2024 newspaper.
Share Email the editor
COMMENT xUnfollow @
The Marengo process should open your eyes:
The Netherlands has become a narco-state
14 hours ago
A Chinese malaise also affects the rest of the world
1 day ago
S.N
AT
tex
 
there peatmas [)
Le”er,
DNS
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
