= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
OPINION
Nature is not full, but wrong
equipped
Nature conservation Too busy in nature? Visitor flows are even better
to steer. For example, make the Veluwe into one large National Park, instead of
several small parks, argues Hans Marijnissen.
February 13, 2024 Reading time 4 minutes
Listening d) Reading list
 also sometimes rest, 10/2). The game feels hunted, birds are scared and the Illustration Hajo
rare plants are trampled. A complaint that is not new, but has been around since the
corona crisis audible. No one will deny that it is getting busier
 forest and on the heath, but it is keeping the public out
is taxing activities the right solution?
First let's take a step back. Because why is it busier?
become in nature? For the most part, that's it
result of years of consciously pursued policy. Nature organizations
have the so-called fifteen years ago
'public forester' introduced, a forester who is not
only manages nature and goes after poachers, but also
Hans Marijnissen is
has the specific task of connecting the general public with the journalist and hiker.
nature: by organizing excursions, providing information on site
and share his experiences on Twitter.
Remarkably, with the rise of these 'stewards of the forest', the
irritation about visitors actually increases. “Sometimes I think: if only the forest could
locked for a while," said ranger Lennard Jasper of Staatsbosbeheer in December
2020 already in NRC. That's a very strange statement, especially coming from one
public forester. He seems to be collapsing under his own success.
What also does not help against the crowds is the introduction of the (cross) bicycle in the
protected nature reserves, something that the previous director of
Natuurmonumenten Marc van den Tweel has worked so hard for. Cyclists
come much further into the forest, communicate shouting and damage the
paths, especially when the water level is high, like now. Van den Tweel loved it so much
cycling that he immediately switched to NOC-NSF in 2021, the track of his
 ambition is still visible every day in the vulnerable nature of the organization he runs
left behind.
People are herd animals
Angry forest rangers have to figure out how to turn the tide
and conservationists perhaps the episode from the television series Nederland van
Above (VPRO, 2011) let's look back, in which the mainly empty landscape is seen from a
helicopter, airplane or hot air balloon is depicted. In the episode
The program makers conduct an experiment 'off the beaten track', coincidentally
exactly in the area where the quoted ranger Jasper holds sway.
One hundred hikers receive a GPS tracker, and the
monitored how they move in the forest. And guess what? By far the
Most hikers neatly follow the signposted route and look deep into the forest
to enter.
The then forest ranger Paul Suurmond of that area says in the broadcast
that people are herd animals. Without a mapped out route they would be hopeless
to get lost. Most visitors find it scary when they hear the sound of
can no longer hear the provincial road.
This fragment shows that nature managers have reduced visitor flows up to
micro-level can largely 'manage' itself. Who parking spaces and
If the roadsides are properly designed, you will not have to deal with traffic chaos. Who enough
constructs post-marked routes, spread over various locations that mainly serve a
 have recreational value and are less vulnerable, this prevents this
hikers clump together, end up in sensitive vegetation or wildlife
to disturb,
Yosemite
When it comes to controlling visitor flows on a larger scale,...
nature managers in the Netherlands learn a lot from the experiences in the United States
States, where, due to a lack of historic buildings, the landscape was very early on
'monument' was cherished. There the rangers protect the vulnerable
areas by using so-called 'zoning': subdivision
of an area into sectors with a specific function,
Anyone who arrives by car in parks such as Yosemite will encounter the edge of it
reserve first on a huge parking lot with a visitor center, catering facilities
and sanitary facilities. From there are easy walks of one hour
to make, on paved paths with trash cans. The dog is allowed to be walked here
and the bridal couple are photographed. Who wants more than a Sunday
detour, you can go on the somewhat wilder paths, and they are quite finished
more strenuous and therefore calmer. The real diehards run in a multi-day course
trip to the core of the area, but they do have a permit for this
necessary, This zoning therefore ensures a distribution of types of visitors, while the
vulnerable flora and fauna are spared,
 Park, that's it
 
you can visit Natuurmonumenten on the
internationally protected Posbank
Now Jasper's Veluwe is not a Yosemite, yet with 91,000 hectares it would be the
could be the largest contiguous nature reserve in Europe. Could be -
the much smaller Veluwe has been divided into all of them again, in Dutch style
small parks, each with its own manager. The amenities are also located
not on the edges, but in the middle of those protected nature reserves. Parking,
At Natuurmonumenten you do that on internationally protected sites
Postbank. There is even an asphalt road leading to it. This is precisely what creates it
unwanted pressure on vulnerable locations.
If nature managers were to join forces, the Veluwe would be one
National Park, but then a nature reserve with allure. With good ones
facilities on the edges, while the core is only accessible to those there
want to invest time, effort and money. The same applies of course to the
other areas.
This is what I would like to say to the angry forest rangers: don't become a green whiner,
but work with your colleagues to build a new layout of our robust nature.
It can take quite a beating.
 Join the discussion on this topic and send a letter!
Would you like to respond to an article? Send a letter via this form (maximum 250 words)
to the NRC opinion editors.
A version of this article also appeared in the February 14, 2024 newspaper.
Share Email the editor
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENT
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
Even the farmer's daughter buys the cheapest one
milk
21 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
