= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
NEWS
North Holland furious about the award
amount from the government to combat the nitrogen crisis
to fight
Nitrogen crisis The province will receive 12 million euros from the government to combat the nitrogen crisis
to exorcise, but counted on almost 80 million euros.
Martin Kuiper February 19, 2024 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening Reading list A
 LJ ele Ll JLU V . = u LJ
7 . Ì Protesting farmers at the Haarlem provincial government building.
to take measures to avert the nitrogen crisis. The province had to
Photo Robin Utrecht/ANP
 The government has reserved a total of 1.3 billion euros for quick measures
announced it earlier this month. The amount has already been approved by the
House of Representatives, but still has to pass the Senate. In particular
agricultural provinces of North Brabant (222 million euros) and Overijssel (142
million), but also Utrecht (284 million) receive a lot of money. Last summer
the provinces have submitted their plans and their costs. They are
subsequently recalculated on behalf of the Ministry of Agriculture
researchers from Wageningen University & Research.
The money must be used to take measures that protect the (nitrogen-sensitive)
nature, water and air quality. This varies from technical
measures in farmers' stables to keep fewer animals. If
Farmers who keep fewer animals also earn less and have to look for them
to other ways to earn extra money.
Two months ago the province of Overijssel and the Kingdom were part of it
the clinch
Agriculture representative of the province of North Holland Jelle Beemsterboer
(BBB) reacts - in a response published online - with annoyance to the award
amount: “We have applied for 80 million to protect North Holland nature
strengthen. But due to apparent arbitrariness of the ministry, we keep 12
 million left. The agricultural representative is referring to the technical solutions that:
According to him, these were included in the plan of the province of North Holland
time pressure” have not been assessed by the government. According to him, only two of them
assessed the seven projects. “This cannot be explained.”
There has been more fuss about the financing of the provincial nitrogen approach.
Two months ago, the province of Overijssel and the government were at odds. When
Overijssel even threatened to stop its approach if the government did not provide money quickly
would cross the bridge. The province itself had millions out of its own pocket
advanced, but was now tired of it - money had to come. In a letter the
province on this. Ultimately, the province did not stop its approach.
The bickering between the government and the provinces symbolizes the fits and starts
very difficult relationship between the two. When the provinces ended
announced their nitrogen plans this summer - a total of 58 billion euros - said one
spokesperson for Minister Christianne van der Wal (VVD, Nitrogen and Nature).
there were few in the provincial approaches cok 'wishes and presents'
had to do with nitrogen and mainly benefited the living environment.
The lack of diplomatic response from the province of North Holland online
published has, in addition to the tight budget that has been allocated, another
cause: the fear of advancing farmers who would cause unrest in the province.
More than a week ago there were suddenly two hundred farmers with tractors
in front of the provincial government building in Haartemn. Those farmers are in trouble, said the
 agricultural deputy. If more money is not available to help farmers, there is an opportunity
that resistance is growing in the province.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Food Quality and Nature (LNV) says that “in
"the expectation" was that not every province would receive the same amount of money
and emphasizes that the provincial plans have been “independently assessed”.
A version of this article also appeared in the February 20, 2024 newspaper.
Share Email the editor
AGRICULTURE AND LIVESTOCK
The company 'Gebroeders C. and K. Kievit' is no more.
Oh well, what does it matter?
12 hours ago
Minister Adema thinks animal-friendly measures are in place
no reduction for agriculture
16 hours ago
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
