12/5/22, 12:41 PM Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down - NRC
N.B. Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
09:14
The groundwater goes
up, nitrogen down
The Netherlands in the rest of this century The major problems with
climate, nitrogen, housing and energy will lead to major
interventions in the landscape.
Ö Sjoerd Klumpenaar & Eppo König © November 25, 2022
Ò Reading time 5 minutes
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/25/het-grondwater-gaat-omhoog-stikstof-omlaag-a4149553 1/6
 12/5/22, 12:41 PM Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down - NRC
Now, in the 1920s, the Netherlands must make decisions on the major themes
the year 2100 and beyond, said Minister Mark Harbers (VVD, Infrastructure and Water Management)
this week in the House of Representatives. Such as whether or not to build a second coastline, a high,
wide dike in the sea as a buffer against sea level rise. At least if we get there enough
sand, because the sea and river dikes also need to be strengthened.
“We know about previous major projects in the Netherlands, the Zuiderzee Works, the...
Delta Works, which ultimately takes about eighty years from initial plans to realization
have lasted," the minister said.
Can't the government hurry up a bit, instead of conducting investigation after investigation?
do, asked impatient parliamentary groups. Climate change and
environmental pollution, but also the energy crisis, housing shortage and traffic jams are being resolved
not on its own.
It shows the frustration with a government that is not moving forward with drastic,
unpopular interventions, at a time of political fragmentation and fierce social
resists.
Very carefully
After almost a year, the Rutte IV cabinet is now very carefully starting that big one
issues for the future. A thick package of letters to Parliament was sent on Friday
published: about nitrogen and agriculture, rural areas and water and soil.
Rutte IV gradually announces that he will take more control, because the big
issues require central management. It gradually becomes clear how drastic this is
the measures become for how we live, work and move.
The Netherlands has been fighting "too much water" for hundreds of years, Minister Harbers said.
but the fight against “too little water” comes next. The supply of freshwater will be in the
In the future, due to more dry summers, population growth will decrease from 17.5 million to 17.5 million
almost 19 million inhabitants in 2035 and economic development. At the same time there is
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/25/het-grondwater-gaat-omhoog-stikstof-omlaag-a4149553 2/6
 12/5/22, 12:41 PM Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down - NRC
salinization of surface and groundwater due to the rising level of the sea, which is deeper
enters the country.
We will therefore have to be much more economical with drinking water, according to the cabinet.
The Netherlands must consume 20 percent less drinking water than now (100 liters in 100 liters).
instead of 125 liters per person per day).
There will be a construction ban in the deepest polders in the Netherlands
How? There will be a "national action plan for drinking water savings", but...
Drinking water will also become more expensive, “with guarantees for affordability,” writes
the Cabinet. The 'five minutes shower a day' due to current energy prices, is becoming
a keeper to save on drinking water costs.
Cutting back on water will have major consequences for drinking water companies, farmers and
gardeners, food manufacturers and industry. The supply of drinking water for
For example, cooling to large-scale consumers, such as data centers, is limited, it says
cabinet letter.
'Our national rain barrel'
Water and land will compete more with each other in this small country. There must be
more freshwater supplies are created, and more water is stored in it
IJsselmeer and the Markermeer: “our national rain barrel”, as the government calls them.
To keep enough space in that barrel, no new islands are allowed in these lakes
are constructed for land reclamation.
The space in wetlands for housing is becoming more limited - even though it has
The government's ambition is to build 900,000 homes nationwide by 2030. Around dikes
and dams, dunes and 'water retaining structures', for example, must have enough space
to be able to strengthen it, even after 2050.
Also new is a future construction ban in 5 to 10 percent of the deep polders
The Netherlands; The government wants to reserve these areas for water storage. That puts the
social discussion about projects such as the 'Fifth Village'
the Zuidplaspolder. Here, at the lowest point in the Netherlands, approximately 6.7 meters below
NAP, 8,000 new homes should be built in the coming years.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/25/het-grondwater-gaat-omhoog-stikstof-omlaag-a4149553 3/6
 12/5/22, 12:41 PM Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down - NRC
The interests of farmers and homeowners clash over water policy. It had already been leaked
this week that the cabinet wants to increase the water level in low peat areas. Large parts
of these areas in the western and northern Netherlands have been drained to make agriculture possible
to make. In rural areas the soil subsides and the peat dries out
harmful greenhouse gas is released.
e . . (Lower Netherlands aah a
This subsidence leads to damage to peat areas: groundwater 2040 re
cm higher. In the lowest-lying polders PP
is no longer built. 7 É j
foundations, causing houses to sink. In
In total, hundreds of thousands of homes are at risk, including coastal areas
Salinization will become more common
especially in the West Netherlands and North Friesland. performance Less sweet
and Groningen. The damage to houses, as well
infrastructure, sewers and public space,
amounts to several billions by 2050.
Also the groundwater level in higher Ml Rivers
More space
sandy soils in eastern Netherlands are increasing.
Soils are affected by this, for example
No longer
build in
floodplains
and nearby
van dikes.
Higher Netherlands
manure, crop protection products, or water discharges
 
longer on high sandy soils
to cling. Groundwater level becomes
of sewage treatment plants. The cabinet (E10 SOE HEE:
NRC 261122 / BL / Source: Climate Adaptation Knowledge Portal
wants to combat desiccation and the “sponge effect”
prevent drying and the 'sponge 5 High and low: measures
restore the soil to retain water
keep and dispose of properly.
But raising the groundwater level in areas also has adverse consequences
farmers. They cannot keep livestock on swampy land and tractors sink.
“Unacceptable,” agricultural and horticultural organization LTO calls it in a response. "By means of
the new soil and water policy will affect almost all soil types and important ones
crops in the Netherlands are affected,” says LTO.
Salinization
The government's policy choices not only affect a professional group such as farmers, but...
entire regions may suffer consequences in the long term.
Additional freshwater is currently being supplied to areas where there is a risk of salinization.
14 percent of the Dutch territory is at risk of becoming salinized: especially the
Wadden area, the Zeeland islands, the coastal areas and polders in the west. The
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/25/het-grondwater-gaat-omhoog-stikstof-omlaag-a4149553 4/6
 12/5/22, 12:41 PM Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down - NRC
increase in salt in the soil is a problem for farmers, nature and for example
drinking water companies.
In the event of drought, peat areas will from now on be given priority in the distribution of peatlands
freshwater, because the groundwater level must rise here. Before the Rhine-Meuse estuary
the west will then not have enough freshwater to combat salinization - and that is possible
also apply to other areas. In fact, the government says: we need the transformation
of the landscape in these regions.
Peak loads
Regarding the approach to nitrogen, it was already leaked earlier this week that the cabinet had allocated 2,000 to
wants to buy out 3,000 major polluters ('peak emitters') in order to restore nature.
Farmers or factories that are not tempted by the one-off buyout offer can
will be forced to stop from 2024.
The government says it does not have an address list or a top 100 of peak loaders: the
approach focuses mainly on farmers and about 50 to 60 companies in the industry.
The government letter about the future prospects for farmers has been deliberately left vague
contains little news. Agriculture Minister Piet Adema (Christian Union) wants room for maneuver
to reach an agricultural agreement with the farmers early next year
the reform of the sector. That will undoubtedly cause irritation in the House of Representatives
who feels sidelined in this process. Adema's predecessor, Henk
Staghouwer, resigned because he could not give the farmers a concrete future perspective.
The Agricultural Agreement must be about tackling nitrogen and the transition to nitrogen
sustainable 'circular agriculture', but also for crop protection, animal diseases and
zoonoses, public health, odor and particulate matter. Farmers are “at the helm” of this one
reform, but it will be a 'mix of voluntary and mandatory measures',
writes Adema. “If there are insufficiently firm agreements, I will not hesitate to make these
announce and implement legal measures towards the chain parties?”
It is clear that agricultural reform is not only for the agricultural chain,
but will have consequences for the whole of the Netherlands. By 2040, supermarkets will have to go it alone
The aim is to still sell sustainable agricultural products. “My intention is to...
fill shelves with sustainable products. And that it is no longer a menu of options,” said
Breathe Friday.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/25/het-grondwater-gaat-omhoog-stikstof-omlaag-a4149553 5/6
 12/5/22, 12:41 PM Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down - NRC
All these reforms require active government intervention, despite the legal deadlines
getting closer and closer. It was the coalition of VVD, D66, CDA and Christian Union that did it
achievement of the nitrogen target has been brought forward from 2035 to 2030. But it is the Council
of State, the highest administrative court, who ruled on the illegal nitrogen policy
that same cabinet had to quit.
The next legal debacle could occur even earlier, in 2027,
comparable to the nitrogen crisis. The surface and groundwater must be collected in that year
The Netherlands are clean and healthy and meet European requirements. Minister Harbers says
that it will succeed, GroenLinks thinks that "miracles" are needed to achieve it.
But if you don't succeed, you will face new environmental lawsuits and the threat of
licensing for farmers, builders and companies to be 'shut down' again,
predict MPs.
A version of this article also appeared in the newspaper of November 26, 2022
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/11/25/het-grondwater-gaat-omhoog-stikstof-omlaag-a4149553 6/6
