Subscribe to DeepL Pro to translate larger documents.
Visit www.DeepL.com/pro for more information.
My news
(|"'/ Podcasts
Digital newspaper
@
Menu nzc'
NEWS
Plasticfabrieli in Antwerp port will come 
after all, despite concerns about Dutch 
nature
Styrofoil emissions UK-based Ineos is still seeking a permit to build a plastic 
factory in the port of Antwerp, ondanlis concerns about styrofoil precipitation in 
Dutch nature.
Martin Kuiper, Milo van Bokkum
January 2024
2 minutes 
Listening')
Reading listg
 the port of Antwerp.
Port of Antwerp. ÜoÏÉJ'JÈ$rÈ$ÏÊÄeI$ÊÄtËx1Ï$$ud ÄËÏÏÏê$ÏÏ$l $Ë'ÊÏi$bÏ(
ÊÊÊÏÏÏÊÊtÏtÏtÏtÏt in 
Photo Peter Hilz/ANP
 of the project, after the Dutch provinces of Zeeland and North Brabant, among others, 
raised objections.
Britain's Ineos wants to build a large plasticfabüelx in the port of Antwerp for 4 
billion euros. The project is controversial: Antwerp and Flanders see an 
investsteüng that will create hundreds of jobs and strengthen the position of the 
Antwerp port. Opponents such as environmental organisations, however, are 
luitic at the intention to produce more new plastic, rather than recycling. Ooh 
they fear the eflects on nature from the fabüelx's stilx dust emissions.
Read also
Dutch nitrogen objections halt billion-dollar project at 
port of Antwerp
North Brabant and Zeeland joined a major procedure against the bedüjf's permit 
in 2022. This is because stilx dust emissions from the project would ooh 
precipitate in the Netherlands, on the hilly forest area De Brabantse Wal near 
Bergen op Zoom. The impact on this nature reserve, already overburdened by stilx 
dust, would not have been sufficiently lxaaGed, the provinces said. The Belgian 
court went along with this in August 2023 and ruled that it should be better 
explained that the effects on nature remain beperlxt.
 Ratcliäe then threatened to stop the whole project in interviews, among other 
things. Ooh woeg he wondered if Europe "wanted a chemical sector "at all. The 
Flemish government guaranteed the Büt that a new licence would be issued 
soon. Ooh, it guaranteed hundreds of millions of euro in additional funding, 
because after the licence fell through, lenders would not simply lend more 
money to the project.
The new permit lxwas granted last Sunday, after which construction work 
resumed immediately on Monday. The Flemish regeüng pointed out that Ineos 
had now better demonstrated that the project's silence effects will be minimal. 
Ooh, the bedüjf should have the installations lilimaatneutralised within ten years. 
By Friday evening, a key government advisory body had already given a 
positive opinion on the licence application.
'Hallucinatory' decision
Nevertheless, han the decision relienen on veelliütielx. Mielie Schauvliege, 
Flemish MP for Green, spoke of a "ha11ucinant "decision. "In essence, nothing 
has changed about the permit. It is. you ask, we turn? "According to her, the 
condition to operate lilimatically neutral within ten years was always in the 
permit.
Ooh several environmental organisations are liritic.-it is already clear, for example, 
that Mobilisation for the Environment(MOB), the Dutch foundation of Johan
 Vollenbroelx, objection goes malx against the new licence, as do a number of other 
organisations.
North Brabant and Zeeland both say they are studying the licence.
"After that, Gedeputeerde Staten will consider any follow-up steps," the Zeeland 
spokesperson said.
Prior to the new licence, there were consultations between Flanders and the 
Netherlands, zeQ a spokesman for Flemish minister Demir. A meetinglxomst 
was held at the Dutch embassy in Brussels on13 December. In attendance were 
Demir, the Dutch outgoing minister for Stilxstof Chüstianne vanderWa1(VVD), 
and deputies from the provinces.
Demir heek there, according to her spokesperson, called for cross-border stilxdust 
conäicts not to be fought out in court.
Between the Netherlands and Belgium, the discussion on stilx dust has been 
hardening for some time. Dutch provinces have alvalxer objected to projects vlalx 
across the Belgian border, such as enlxele megastables vlalx near North Brabant.
Conversely, Belgium is annoyed that a concrete stilxstofaanpalx in the Netherlands
omission token: Belgium would ooh suffer from Dutch emissions. OndeGussen, 
according to Demir, Belgium's emissions that precipitate in the Netherlands do 
decrease in the lxcoming years. "We are a stulx further than the Netherlands," Demir 
told NRC in November. She hopes the stilxstofaanpalx in Flanders will start in 
2024. "In terms of stilxstofaanpalx, the Netherlands is still completely 
nowhere?
 Read also
Still no forced buyout of farms and manure 
processors in Flanders
A version of this article also appeared in the 10 January 2024 newspaper.
Sharing -'g
Email the editor B
BELGIUM
Grim atmosphere at farmers' protests in Brussels
?5 egg
2o'n
Motorist in Ghent kills two winders
 Subscribe to 'Insider information' 
newsletter
Economy editors take you through their 
editorial discussions on current 
developments
NRC Websites
About NRC
My NRC
Contact
Take a
Editorial
nrc'
Media house 
NRC NRC 
Career NRC 
Webstore NRC 
About us 
Working at 
Copyright 
Privacy
Readers' Fund
subscription
Opinion 
editorial
Login
The 
ombudsman
Create account
Colophon
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list 
Customer 
service My 
Delivery terms and 
conditions NRC Code
Our app Archive 
subscriptionsFa
Advertising
mily messages 
Service & 
delivery
Newsletters
