= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
NEWS
Farmers and climate demonstrators do not
impressed with announced
tougher approach to the police and the judiciary
Violent protests An emergency order was issued in Apeldoorn on Wednesday
issued due to farmers' plans to storm the police station, where
two demonstrators detained. Outgoing Yesilgöz (Justice and Security, VVD)
announced that violent protests and illegal demonstrations are getting louder
addressed.
Marcel Haenen February 2024 Reading time
 
2 minutes
Listen Reading List |
 demonstrations.
 The mayor of Apeldoorn, Ton Heerts, showed up on Wednesday evening
forced to declare an emergency order for the entire municipality. With that order
the police can take action against rioters, close roads, evacuate places
and ban gatherings. People who don't cooperate can become
arrested.
The special order measure was deemed necessary because the police via
farmers' chat groups on social media channels established that a storm had occurred
of the head office in Apeldoorn was planned. Two men are trapped there
who were arrested on Monday evening during violent farmers' protests on the
A50 near Beekbergen. A 39-year-old man from Klarenbeek and a 35-year-old man from
Eerbeek are prosecuted on suspicion of 'dumping outside an institution
of waste, and of blocking the road,” said a spokesperson for the
Public Prosecution Service in Eastern Netherlands.
Also read
Hundreds of XR demonstrators on the A10 omte
protest against ING
Take stricter action from now on
The emergency order in Apeldoorn was lifted again on Thursday morning. It is quiet
stayed. The police remain vigilant, also because of the arrested farmers
will be brought before the examining magistrate on Friday. Justice wants them longer
 remain stuck. According to the Public Prosecution Service, Monday evening in the East of the Netherlands is at fifteen
Waste has been dumped in various locations, arson has been set or blockages have arisen
by waste or agricultural vehicles. “The unannounced actions led to major ones
nuisance and, in a number of places, unsafe situations.”
The highway had to be closed all night for clearing work,
The fire brigade was attacked while extinguishing the fire in Staphorst, Steenwijk and Apeldoorn
by demonstrators.
Outgoing Minister Dilan Yesilgóz of Justice and Security, VVD) said on Wednesday
After urgent consultation with the police and the Public Prosecution Service, we announced that this will be stricter from now on
action is taken against violent protests and illegal demonstrations. The
farmers' protests on Monday have caused the minister "a lot of anger and...
frustration” led. The minister said in the House of Representatives on Tuesday that the actions
“really went beyond all limits.” Demonstrating results, according to Yesilgöz
Moreover, they increasingly commit crimes.
“We see farmer protests where fires are set or hazardous substances are used
roads are dumped. We see XR demonstrations where time and time again
public roads are occupied, people glue themselves to the road surface and themselves
resist the police, We see demonstrations, this weekend in my own
city, where slogans are chanted such as: 'Death to Rutte. Death to Biden;
The minister then called on mayors to “really do everything they can to...
to prevent these types of actions, indeed through police deployment,”
 'Fossil moneylender'
“The Public Prosecution Service and the police are taking firm action and are also considering the possibilities
fine and prosecute afterwards, The identity data will be
established and registered,” said a joint statement issued after the
judicial deliberation was issued. The boss of the Public Prosecution Service Rinus Otte
et on X know that “setting fire to hay bales and possibly asbestos on the
highways is a serious criminal offence.”
The police have taken measures to quickly increase deployment and capacity nationwide
can distribute. “In the coming period, as much as possible will be direct
took action against activists who violated the law or otherwise
she may be fined and prosecuted afterwards.'
Extinction Rebellion announced a stricter approach after the announcement
protest against ING, "as the largest fossil lender in the Netherlands", on Saturday
February 24 to block the A10 in Amsterdam at the former ING
head office De Schoen.
The climate demonstrators are not afraid of fines. “Also (precisely) as the government
fed up, we have the right to demonstrate peacefully. It is known that the
judge finds arrest sufficient punishment for violation of the Public Act
Manifestations. That is why we will contest every fine. We see the outcome
with confidence,” says Extinction.
 Also read
Columns of tractors drive through Europe. Why
farmers take to the streets everywhere
A version of this article also appeared in the February 9, 2024 newspaper.
Share °% Email the editor
POLICE, LAW AND CRIME
Taghi behind bars: no letters, no Mean anam
 
aman
phone calls, no imam and only 45 minutes and nnn
 
et
ae 4
strength training per week | | Ë |
10 hours ago
The Marengo process should open your eyes:
The Netherlands has become a narco-state
14 hours ago
[Toxer weenras
E.S
GIN
O
 My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
