12/5/22, 12:45 PM In the lowest polder in the Netherlands you can see why the water level can no longer be lowered - NRC
N.B. Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
05:30
Report
In the lowest polder of
The Netherlands can be seen
why the water level
can no longer be
reduced
Water level Although the
the ground sinks, the water level will no longer keep up with it
reduced. “We are increasingly reaching our limits.”
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/in-de-laagste-polder-van-nederland-is-te-zien-waarom-het-waterpeil-niet-meer-kan-worden- reduced-a4150323 1/5
 12/5/22, 12:45 PM In the lowest polder in the Netherlands you can see why the water level can no longer be lowered - NRC
The Schieland and Krimperwaard Water Board has decided to raise the water level in the
Zuidplaspolder to be kept high to prevent soil subsidence.
Photos: Walter Herfst ta
We are standing more than six meters below sea level, on the floor of a pumping station that is the deepest
keeps the polder of the Netherlands dry. This is the Zuidplaspolder. About part of this area
water managers made a remarkable decision this week: although the
peat soil drops annually, the water level will no longer keep up with this decline
to fail. “If we continue in the same way, we have reached the end of the
feasibility of the Netherlands,” says Toon van der Klugt, the highest boss as dike grapher
of the Schieland and Krimpenerwaard Water Board.
The soil is like this in part of the Zuidplaspolder
has fallen significantly, that salty groundwater is bubbling up and
pollutes the ditches, causing them to turn orange,
by oxidizing iron. Nice for football fans
these days, but certainly undesirable. Of the
Klugt: “We have it in previous centuries
water level always adjusted to soil subsidence,
so that the same agriculture remained possible, But
that process is finite. We now say on time: we
can't lower the water level anymore, keep
take that into account”
Government policy
The measure was unanimous this week, so also with
agreement of the representatives of the
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/in-de-laagste-polder-van-nederland-is-te-zien-waarom-het-waterpeil-niet-meer-kan-worden- reduced-a4150323
2/5
 12/5/22, 12:45 PM In the lowest polder in the Netherlands you can see why the water level can no longer be lowered - NRC
farmers, taken by the general council of
It is no longer possible to adjust the water level,
the Rotterdam Water Board. "That is
says dike warden Toon van der Klugt
special,” says the dike mayor. “Everyone understands
the Schieland Water Board
that adjusting the water level is no longer possible.
and Krimpenerwaard.
However, it has been urged to consult with the municipality
province now faster to a good
future prospects”
The decision is a rather ideal illustration of the usefulness and necessity of the policy that
the cabinet announced last week in which water and soil will from now on be 'controlling'
will affect the spatial planning of the country. “Confidence in the
feasibility of our landscape is great. But now we are increasingly encountering problems
the limits of the water and soil system,” wrote Minister Mark Harbers
(Waterstaat, VVD) in a letter to Parliament. “Soil subsidence and low water levels are causing this
a lot of damage to the foundations of buildings and extra maintenance on roads and
railways. Sufficient good drinking water is no longer a given. It
survival of plant and animal species is under pressure”
Some measures that the government is proposing: no more construction should be done
areas that are necessary for storing and draining water, such as floodplains and the
deepest parts of deep polders; and the Netherlands must strive for a higher level
groundwater level, because that provides sufficient water if it does not rain for a while, slows down the
decline in peat soils and reduces greenhouse gas emissions.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/in-de-laagste-polder-van-nederland-is-te-zien-waarom-het-waterpeil-niet-meer-kan-worden- reduced-a4150323 3/5
 12/5/22, 12:45 PM In the lowest polder in the Netherlands you can see why the water level can no longer be lowered - NRC
there EE
 
and she Toad
In part of the Zuidplaspolder, which was drained almost two hundred years ago,
between Rotterdam, Zoetermeer and Gouda, it can be seen that such policy intentions have no effect
are a thing of the future, but are already a dire necessity. This is the first area, so far
known, in which the 'inflection point' has been reached. The Restveen, part of the polder
between Moordrecht and Nieuwerkerk aan den IJssel of almost four hundred hectares
from peat that dries out further every year and actually burns and shrinks. That's why
the increasingly lighter soil can no longer withstand the upward pressure
groundwater. The soil is cracking open and poor quality groundwater is causing damage
to farmland, nature and inhabited living environments. That effect is at its lowest here
part of the Netherlands is also extra large. The soil is also at risk elsewhere in the polder
without bursting measures. “You then get stuck on all sides,” says Van der Klugt.
Also read:
Groundwater goes up, nitrogen goes down
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/in-de-laagste-polder-van-nederland-is-te-zien-waarom-het-waterpeil-niet-meer-kan-worden- reduced-a4150323 4/5
 12/5/22, 12:45 PM In the lowest polder in the Netherlands you can see why the water level can no longer be lowered - NRC
In addition to the damage caused by poor quality water, there is also a risk of subsidence elsewhere.
“There is a railway line here. If it starts to sag, you're talking about a
millions in damage. The NS has already warned about this?” Also other users like
homeowners could come under fire. The usefulness of quitting the
downward water level reduction was already known twenty years ago, when the province
South Holland had plans to turn the Restveen into a piece of 'wet nature' and
thus combating land subsidence. However, the plans did not go ahead when the government
suddenly turned off the money tap. In the years that followed, the level did not become 'provisional?'
reduced. From now on it is finally clear that there will be no more lowering of the level
come. Van der Klugt: “The benefits no longer outweigh the costs. The time of
porridge and wetness is over. The current water level is the starting point for everyone?”
Alternatives
The consequences of the decision will mainly affect a limited number of farmers and a few
feel like a horse owner. Grazing cattle and harvesting grass, now also a tour
the force in the fairly wet area will become less and less possible. "The farmers
understand that too. But this decision is also a signal to the province and the Netherlands
municipality to discuss alternatives with users” You could use the
in the next ten or twenty years, we will be able to use lighter machines across the farmland
drive, and later grow other crops or build solar parks. For example. Or still
creating wet nature. “That could be possible” Will the rest of the Netherlands follow suit?
"We do not know that. Every area is different. We do it wisely”
A version of this article also appeared in the December 3, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/02/in-de-laagste-polder-van-nederland-is-te-zien-waarom-het-waterpeil-niet-meer-kan-worden- reduced-a4150323 5/5
