= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
DAIRY REPORT
Milk on the Amstel for meadow birds
Local dairy A new dairy factory in Ouderkerk aan de Amstel pays farmers
a premium the more they commit themselves to the meadow birds. From mid-May
the bird-friendly dairy products for sale. “But don't expect a meadow smell from it
milk carton.”
Manon Stravens, Hans Ariëns May 2, 2019 Reading time 3 minutes
Reading list U
 you!
Photo Rien Zilfold
 The 'weed butter' and the polder cheese Rondje Ronde Hoep' were already there,
“Why didn't we also sell our own milk in the city?” he says
dairy farmer and cooperative chairman Kees Nieuwendijk returns. The need for
regional products grows. “A million people live here, there was a market there
be first." Two years later the Amstelgoed Natuurzuivel factory was the fruit of
a collaboration between 21 farmers, Bird Protection Netherlands and
co-financier Wijland, a fact.
The landscape around the expanding capital is still open and vast. The
Cows run there - unlike in intensive livestock farming - from mid-April to mid-April
October in the meadow. “It is therefore special that Amstelland is one of the few areas
is where the meadow bird population is maintained," says Kees de Pater of the
Bird protection. Threatened often by intensive agriculture, the black-tailed godwit,
redshank, lapwing and oystercatcher have been declining in numbers throughout the Netherlands for years, but in
the swampy peat meadow area of Amstelland they benefit from the high
water level. And one of about forty farmers who care about meadow birds.
Flowers, herbs and late mowing
“Most of the farmers do something about nature management,” says De Pater
mow late, reserve a piece of grassland for flowers and herbs. That attracts
insects and worms and the chicks are safe from predators. Keep there
the birds of.” The cooperative will reward that effort according to a points system
with a share of the profit, on top of the guaranteed price that Friesland Campina offers,
 It is not the best milk, but the best effort for the birds that counts. Also participating
beef farmers, who do not supply milk, can compete.
Realizing that idea took a lot of effort. Like long negotiations
with customer FrieslandCampina, which previously allowed individual farmers to register
save a few liters, maximum 10 percent, of milk to make your own cheese. For
For the first time, a group of farmers is now receiving an exemption to jointly own a third of their land
to supply milk to their own factory. “FrieslandCampina is an oil tanker, too
large to be able to realize this in their own factories. But they know they
something has to be done with that desire for regional products. So they support our initiative,”
said Nieuwendijk.
At Rabobank they initially refused with their request for financing. At
risky, such a start-up. Although the bank has been calling for efforts for some time now
regional products and biodiversity. Quite a disappointment, says Nieuwendijk.
“Almost all members are financed by Rabobank, why don't you support it
initiative of your entrepreneurs?” Now the factory and equipment are subsidized and
financed by a loan from the National Green Fund. They are now together again
the Rabobank in discussions.
Also read
Ecological farming in exchange for land
Selling dairy turned out to be the biggest challenge. Nieuwendijk: “Then
farming is still simple." De Pater: "We compete in a saturated market. People
 are interested and enthusiastic, but when push comes to shove, you run into problems
wholesalers and buyers. We have enthusiastic farmers and a goodwill factor
companies, but we have to find enough buyers” Contracts with the
Isbreeker, IJscuypie and Margt supermarket have arrived. With potential customers
as well as the AMG and the catering industry on the Zuidas, discussions are still ongoing.
Leave the milk alone
Don't expect a 'pasture smell' from the milk carton. The cream collar is also removed ("not
everyone loves that”). Furthermore, the factory leaves the milk raw as much as possible
with peace. For the taste. Because it usually involves 'pulling, pumping, slurping and...
centrifuging” breaks the milk, according to the dairy farmer. So there will be
no skimmed milk, half full at most. “But I don't know if we should want that.
First let's understand those machines.” Then, chuckling: “and then there's cottage cheese
to make of it.” The factory first supplied whole milk, later also yoghurt and yoghurt
soft cheese. Consumers will soon be able to purchase a pack of Boeren van Amstel
supermarkets in Amstelland and at Margt (price: around 1.40 euros).
The city is advancing, large houses are being built on the expensive land along the Amstel, with...
resulting in clutter. “See that as a threat or an opportunity,” says
Nieuwendijk, “The city comes to us, people come to the polder to farm
to see." They organize polder safaris and other forms of recreation, Self runs
he and his wife the Farmer's Tent Camping. “People prefer that to one
city hotel”
 The dairy factory offers many opportunities, De Pater thinks. “A short chain is better
the climate and in the long term the subsidies may stop. This milk holds
both farmers and meadow birds are preserved.”
Also read
about a farmer who shares some of his pasture
voluntarily puts it under water for the godwit
A version of this article also appeared in NRC Handelsblad on May 4, 2019.
Email the editor MA
Share 9%
My NRC
NRC Websites
About NRC
Contact
nic)
Take one
Media house NRC
Editorial
About us
Work at
Opinion editorial
NRC Career
subscription
login
NRC Webshop
Copyright
The ombudsman
NRC Readers Fund
create an account
Colophon
Privacy
Terms of delivery
Digital newspaper
AdSales
My reading list
Customer service
NRC Code
My subscriptions
Family messages
Our app
Archive
Service & delivery
To advertise
Newsletters
 NN W f ©) EH
