= Menu MEC)» WD Mijnnieuws dg} Podcasts [EF] Digitalekrant Q
NEWS
Plastic factory is coming to the port of Antwerp
there anyway, despite concerns about it
Dutch nature
Nitrogen emissions The British Ineos nevertheless receives a permit to build one
plastic factory in the port of Antwerp, despite concerns about nitrogen deposition
Dutch nature.
Martin Kuiper, Milo van Bokkum January 9, 2024 Reading time 2 minutes
Listening d) Reading list A
 |
—t
mer
mn
INEOS
 
WS
BD
 
fem
Eg jn
i.e
®
At
 
4
"a
 
—
iin wd
e ij È KA 1
Hey. x/ ita and Kk ú akde ME ALONE
PREVIOUS GIL NeXrLL KILL VVS V hadde» ) LLL L VUUYY Val rr rU
The British Ineos wants a \astic for 4 billion euros!
 
building a gbrie in the port of Antwerp.
port of Antwerp. Last year the VEEG Oo de sti was killed
 
CO2 emissions p
Photo Peter Hilz/ANP
 of the project, after the Dutch provinces of Zeeland and North
Brabant had objected.
The British Ineos wants to build a large plastic factory in the Netherlands for 4 billion euros
port of Antwerp. The project is controversial: Antwerp and Flanders
see an investment that will create hundreds of jobs and the position of the
Antwerp port strengthened. However, opponents such as environmental organizations are
critical of the intention to produce more new plastic, instead of too
to recycle. They also fear the effects of nitrogen emissions on nature
factory.
Also read
Dutch nitrogen objections
billion-dollar project in the port of Antwerp at a standstill
North Brabant and Zeeland joined a major procedure against this in 2022
the license for the company. This is because nitrogen emissions from the project also occur
The Netherlands would settle on the hilly forest area De Brabantse Wal near
Bergen op Zoom. The consequences for this nature reserve, which is already overloaded by
nitrogen, would not have been mapped sufficiently, according to the provinces. The
The Belgian judge agreed with this in August 2023 and ruled that it was better
it had to be explained that the consequences for nature remain limited.
 Ratcliffe then threatened in interviews to stop the whole thing
project. He also wondered whether Europe wanted “a chemical sector at all”.
to have. The Flemish government guaranteed the Brit that there would be a new one soon
permit would come. She also guaranteed hundreds of millions of euros
to bank financing, because after the cancellation of the license lenders
did not simply want to provide more credit for the project.
The new permit was issued last Sunday, followed immediately on Monday
construction work resumed. The Flemish government pointed out that
Ineos had now better demonstrated the nitrogen effects of the project
will be minimal. The company must also complete the installations within ten years
made climate neutral. Friday evening had an important advisory body
the government has already given positive advice on the permit application.
'Hallucinant' pollinates
Nevertheless, the decision can count on a lot of criticism. Mieke Schauvliege,
Flemish MP for Green, speaks of a "hallucinatory" decision. "To the
permit has essentially not changed. It is: you ask, we discuss.” According to her
the condition to work climate neutrally within ten years was always included
permit.
Several environmental organizations are critical: for example, it is already clear
that Mobilization for the Environment (MOB), Johan's Dutch foundation
 Vollenbroek, will object to the new permit, as will a number of others
other organizations.
North Brabant and Zeeland have both announced that they are studying the permit.
“The Provincial Executive will then consider possible next steps,”
said the spokesperson for Zeeland.
Prior to the new permit, there was consultation between Flanders
and the Netherlands, says a spokesperson for the Flemish minister Demir. On 13
There was a meeting at the Dutch embassy in December
Brussels. This included Demir, the Dutch outgoing Minister for Nitrogen
Christianne van der Wal (VVD), and deputies from the provinces present.
According to her spokesperson, Demir has called for cross-border actions
nitrogen conflicts cannot be resolved in court.
The discussion about nitrogen has been heating up between the Netherlands and Belgium for some time.
Dutch provinces have often objected to flat projects
across the Belgian border, such as some mega stables near North Brabant.
Conversely, Belgium is annoyed by a concrete nitrogen approach in the Netherlands
is omitted: Belgium would also suffer from Dutch emissions.
In the meantime, according to Demir, Belgium's emissions are precipitating
The Netherlands will be finished in the coming years. “We are a lot further along than the Netherlands,” he said
Demir against NRC in November. She hopes that the nitrogen approach in Flanders will be successful
2024 starts. “The Netherlands is still completely nowhere in terms of nitrogen approach.”
 Also read
No forced buyout after all
farms and manure processors in Flanders
A version of this article also appeared in the January 10, 2024 newspaper.
Share °% Email the editor
BELGIUM
Grim atmosphere at farmers' protests in Brussels
February 26, 2024
Motorist in Ghent kills two cyclists
February 25, 2024
 Write
 
sign up for the newsletter
Í 'Inside knowledge'
Economics editors take you into the (
discussions they have in the editorial office
about current developments
About NRC My NRC Contact
NRC Websites
nic)
Media house NRC
About us Get an Editorial Staff
Working at subscription Opinion Editorial
NRC Career
NRC Webshop
Copyright Login The Ombudsman
Privacy Create account Colophon
NRC Readers Fund
Terms of delivery Digital newspaper AdSales
NRC Code My reading list Customer service
Our app My subscriptions Family messages
Archive Service & delivery
Advertising Newsletters
NN W f ©) EH
