12/10/22, 10:08 AM It will take 30 years, cost billions and start after the summer: the redevelopment of the Netherlands - NRC
N.B. Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
06:57
It takes 30 years, costs
billions and starts after the
summer: the redesign
from The Netherlands
Future From greening the cities to reforming the
agriculture, the Netherlands will be overhauled over the next 30 years. "Not
everything is possible and not everything is possible everywhere.'
L, ES nm Ee ‚ we
A han A | your ed
z on
tn dn a ij zz ee 8 pa
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/07/25/in-de-grote-verbouwing-wordt-heel-nederland-binnenstebuiten- Nooit-a4137371 1/5
 12/10/22, 10:08 AM It will take 30 years, cost billions and start after the summer: the redevelopment of the Netherlands - NRC
A DUCK
Minister Hugo de Jonge (Public Housing
and Spatial Planning, CDA) it. The major redevelopment of city and countryside
which will start after the summer and will cost many billions. Until 2050 and beyond, a
'spatial puzzle' must be solved in which various social
issues are addressed. Consider: housing shortage and asylum reception,
climate change and energy transition, agriculture and nitrogen, environment and nature, traffic
and transport and the economic development of the Netherlands.
Also read:
How the government controls the organization of the Netherlands
let go
Twelve years ago, the Rutte I cabinet left national control over urbanization
landscape policy and transferred it to the provinces and municipalities. Now it goes
the Rutte IV cabinet is sending the government again because the problems are acute. The major renovation
will be a battle for space, because the Netherlands is too small for all wishes, plans and
ambitions. “Not everything is possible and not everything is possible everywhere,” says De Jonge.
What will the Netherlands look like after 2050 - if the plans succeed? In October the
twelve provinces will make plans for both national and regional goals. A
years later, the national government and provinces make new agreements on area development. In
By 2024, the refined National Environmental Vision (NOVI), the long-term vision of
the government on spatial planning. coming into effect.
The contours of the major renovation are already emerging. The ambition is well known
the government to build 900,000 homes by 2030, two-thirds of which will be affordable
must be rental or purchase. Many homes are planned in the west, such as in the region
Amsterdam (175,000 to 220,000 homes) and the southern Randstad (170,000). But
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/07/25/in-de-grote-verbouwing-wordt-heel-nederland-binnenstebuiten- Nooit-a4137371 2/5
 12/10/22, 10:08 AM It will take 30 years, cost billions and start after the summer: the reorganization of the Netherlands - NRC
there should also be more homes in, for example, the Arnhem-Nijmegen region
(70,000), urban Brabant (94,000), the Zwolle region (40,000) and the Groningen-
Assen (21,000 homes). The Lelylijn, a proposed train connection between Lelystad and
Groningen must make the north more accessible.
Local flooding
“We can't all continue to live in a huddle in the Randstad,” says
Minister De Jonge. “Because it is too expensive and too busy, and we have too much space there
for example for nature, agriculture and economy”
Climate change is also a reason to build more outside the low-lying west.
“It may be wise” to “promote development in the southern, eastern and northern areas.”
parts of the Netherlands (...) in areas that are less susceptible to
floods,” states dryly in a letter to Parliament from May.
One sentence from the coalition agreement is also far-reaching: “Water and soil become
guiding spatial planning.” What can be built where will depend
for example, local flooding, land subsidence, heat stress, pollution and so on
natural damage.
“It is not just about housing construction, but also about questions such as: where do you build any
new nuclear power stations?”, says Meindert Smallenbroek, director of the Union of
Regional water authorities. “It's about choices for hundreds of years”
The Netherlands must continue to defend itself against water and become "climate-proof". Sea-
and river dikes will be raised and strengthened where necessary. Risk areas
must be able to drain water during extreme rainfall or flooding, as in
Limburg last year. Water buffers must also be created to supply the freshwater supply
to fill; the high sandy soils dry out, the coast and polders become salinized.
The subsidence in peat meadow areas, once drained
for agriculture, leads to collapsed buildings and
infrastructure. Water boards have to work harder and harder
pumps and greenhouse gases are released from dried peat
free. The government and provinces must choose where agriculture and
living is still responsible, such as in Southwest Friesland.
Smallenbroek: “That will affect farmers, and the sectors and
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/07/25/in-de-grote-verbouwing-wordt-heel-nederland-binnenstebuiten- Nooit-a4137371 3/5
 12/10/22, 10:08 AM It will take 30 years, cost billions and start after the summer: the redevelopment of the Netherlands - NRC
society around it. Those are almost cultural #40 Hague Affairs in the
summer: the big one
interventions. I have the feeling that you sometimes underestimate that
crisis episode
is becoming."
The nitrogen approach will lead to shrinkage, sustainability, etc
redistribution of agriculture, which currently accounts for half of
nature and nitrogen are most suitable according to the government
for agriculture are mainly Zeeland, the north of North Holland, Friesland and
Groningen, Flevoland - and Gelderland and Brabant much less.
Industry clusters
Space is also needed at sea and on land for the extraction, storage and transport of minerals
sustainable energy, from wind turbines and solar panels. The government is thinking about big ones
'industrial clusters' in specific, safe locations, preferably near railway lines,
waterways, high-voltage cables or pipe networks.
Large economic and logistics hubs must become more sustainable
climate-neutral Netherlands in 2050. Such as the ports of Rotterdam and the region
Terneuzen-Vlissingen, just like the North Sea Canal area in the Amsterdam metropolis.
Schiphol also needs to transform, while at the same time maintaining space in a densely populated area
residential area.
Cities, in turn, must switch from natural gas to sustainable energy and become greener
to counteract heat. It penetrates into the subsoil to protect both trees and cables
and heat networks. The centers of cities will become more car-free and
Fast electric (bicycle) traffic requires extra space on public roads.
Also read: Greening this Rotterdam district is
a battle for the subsoil
If you want a high-quality knowledge economy as a country, you must also choose one
high-quality living and working environment, says professor of landscape architecture Adriaan
Geuze from TU Delft. “Quality and beautiful cultural landscape, a healthy environment and...
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/07/25/in-de-grote-verbouwing-wordt-heel-nederland-binnenstebuiten- Nooit-a4137371 4/5
 12/10/22, 10:08 AM It will take 30 years, cost billions and start after the summer: the reorganization of the Netherlands - NRC
efficient mobility is the basis for attractive cities and innovative workplaces.
Look at Switzerland or Denmark”
Such a high-quality landscape also requires the direction that the government now says it will resume,
according to Geuze. “It is about existential, integral choices, such as the reform of the...
agriculture, water management, a high-speed line or new data centers. You must
democratic guarantee and that is what parliament is for?”
The major renovation will therefore have to start by breaking through the current one
practice. According to Geuze, spatial planning has become “incomprehensible
lobby” of interest groups in the (local) government, which promotes the general interest
has been oppressed. “The Netherlands has the best planning tradition in the world.
But right now we are at a complete impasse. It's extra-parliamentary
it is a democratic deficit”
A version of this article also appeared in the July 26, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/07/25/in-de-grote-verbouwing-wordt-heel-nederland-binnenstebuiten- Nooit-a4137371 5/5
