12/10/22, 10:09 AM Modern agriculture is disastrous for biodiversity. But not in the Ooijpolder, where the butterflies flutter back and forth - NRC
N.B. Elements may be missing from this print version.
Listen to
07:12
Report
Modern agriculture is
disastrous for biodiversity.
But not in the
Ooijpolder, fluttering there
e butterflies off and on
Biodiversity in the polder Enrich hawthorn hedges and pools
nature in rural areas, and suppress insect pests.
"A big success.
Ö MarcelaandeBrugh © 8december2022 Ò Reading time 4 minutes
 12/10/22, 10:09 AM Modern agriculture is disastrous for biodiversity. But not in the Ooijpolder, where the butterflies flutter back and forth - NRC
'ni Er
f
While governments are meeting in Montreal these weeks to discuss better protection of
biodiversity, professor of plant ecology Hans de Kroon and PhD candidate Robin
Lexmond see what has already been achieved in rural areas over the past fifteen years
Ooijpolder, near Nijmegen. How butterflies flutter back and forth. How there
orchids have started to bloom.
Also read:
The rate at which animals and plants became extinct was in
ten million years not that high
“But this is about the worst day to show that,” says De Kroon. On
This Monday morning, late autumn, it is gray, gray and drizzly. Just like Lexmond
jokingly says that biodiversity "is hard to find now", a wren lands in it
a bush nearby, and hops from branch to branch.
Modern, large-scale agriculture is one of the major causes of the
decline in biodiversity. In the tropics, rainforest is being cut down and converted into
agricultural land, especially pastures for livestock, or fields for growing livestock feed. In
Europe's biodiversity suffered mainly after the Second World War
intensification of agriculture: the emergence of vast monocultures with high
input of (artificial) fertilizer and pesticides. According to inventories of the
The Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency is seeing a downward trend in the Netherlands
biodiversity in nature reserves has on average now come to a standstill.
However, the decline continues in rural areas.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/08/moderne-landbouw-is-funest-voor-biodiversiteit-maar-niet-in-de-ooijpolder-daar-fladderen-de-vlinders-af- and-on-...
2/6
 12/10/22, 10:09 AM Modern agriculture is disastrous for biodiversity. But not in the Ooijpolder, where the butterflies flutter back and forth - NRC
But not in the Ooijpolder. Many farmers had contracts here about fifteen years ago
signed to free up parts of their land for so-called landscape elements.
We pass them during the walk between the meadows and fields. Back to back
pollard willows, hawthorn hedges, herb-rich strips along the fields, pools, faded
bank slopes. In return, the farmers receive long-term compensation - for maintenance and maintenance
lost income. “The guaranteed compensation for 30 years is especially great
important,” says De Kroon. In the distance, an egret perches in a puddle.
Icarus blue
As we pass a row of pollarded willows, and great tits chatter at us
Lexmond enthusiastically lists the types of butterflies they saw last summer
has already seen in the area. “Icarus blues, fatheads, brown sand-eyes, small
veined whites, and also more special species such as brown blue and orange alfalfa butterfly.”
De Kroon coordinates a project started last year that investigates how biodiversity can be improved
can be restored in rural areas. There is via the National Science Agenda of NWO
more than 4 million euros has been made available. The project will last five years, he says.
In addition to the Ooijpolder, the research is also underway in the western Dutch bulb region
and in the peat meadow area of the Alblasserwaard. “Hey look,” says Lexmond. She points
to a field of corn stubble. A hare darts away.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/08/moderne-landbouw-is-funest-voor-biodiversiteit-maar-niet-in-de-ooijpolder-daar-fladderen-de-vlinders-af- and-on-.... 3/6
 Modern agriculture is disastrous for biodiversity. But not in the Ooijpolder, where the butterflies flutter back and forth - NRC
AND IN X 8 SIDES SENA 8 | ' 7 — 7 7 U > Se STAN RENS SN
N \ ABN Ay Ki e/ / ; Ni, 2 NN TK °
AN \ NEN IONA N ie 740%, hz BMA NR NE
\ K \ N KV Ns ES S ) Il 4 pe lar N hy Í \
\ \ N SN N \ Sk 3 / \ 4 PT TN Seb Ù N cl
N \ RN \ EAR Al EIL IE— iN A XL SENA DN À
X \ HN DSN NN NN fe Ô ì y / / Ls BS Ae qa i
4 \ EN 4 _N N\ \ ) / N pd £ Î i \ AN + N \
A N & eN \ / Aid Vs” \ k BK \
'N KNB AKN Ei / VL FS \ \ RE
Hans de Kroon and Robin Lexmond show what has already been achieved in the past fifteen years
countryside of the Ooijpolder.
Photo Flip Franssen ta
The project that De Kroon coordinates has a link with the Delta Plan set up in 2018
Biodiversity restoration, a partnership of nature organizations, farmers,
governments, companies and knowledge institutions. They handed over last September
Minister Van der Wal (VVD, Nature and Nitrogen) has drawn up a plan to achieve 10.00 in the next 30 years
percent of the countryside with landscape elements. Until 2030 there is 7.5
billion euros in long-term compensation.
Wageningen researchers have found the usefulness and effect of this plan
landscape elements mapped out. Various functions have been investigated,
says Irene Bouwma on the phone. Capturing CO», better control
of insect pests in crops, water infiltration, air purification. “Especially the first one
two functions clearly stand out,” says Bouwma. That actually makes sense. "A
A row of pollarded willows captures more CO than a barbed wire” And all those
landscape elements provide all kinds of species with additional habitat, protection and nutrition,
she says, “They also pull the crops from those hawthorn hedges or herb-rich strips
in, and there suppress plagues”
Skylark
An initial analysis of the changes in the Ooijpolder was made in 2014
biodiversity, by the Bargerveen Foundation. Ecologist Marijn Nijssen co-wrote it
report. He says that they made a comparison between areas where conscious
landscape elements have been constructed, and areas nearby without those elements.
“Bird species such as the warbler and the skylark clearly did better in areas
with those elements” This also applied to many insects, and a species like the great crested newt,
says Nijssen. A combination of different landscape elements seemed best
to work. Nijssen calls the initiative in the Ooijpolder “a great success”. It makes
However, he says, it still remains to be seen how the elements will be maintained. “Farmers have
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/08/moderne-landbouw-is-funest-voor-biodiversiteit-maar-niet-in-de-ooijpolder-daar-fladderen-de-vlinders-af- and-on-.... 4/6
 12/10/22, 10:09 AM Modern agriculture is disastrous for biodiversity. But not in the Ooijpolder, where the butterflies flutter back and forth - NRC
the tendency to want the landscape to be very neat
to hold. We then say: it is possible
sloppier.” woah!
Nijmegen 4
1km
NRC 093222'/RL
Also read:
Hurry is needed to prevent a new mass extinction
occur, say biologists and ecologists
The Crown recognizes that image. His father was a farmer. “He always told me: a sloppy one
farmer is a bad farmer” Creating and managing landscape elements requires a lot of effort
different mindset. “But many farmers really have a heart for nature.”
We walk past a field with rapeseed. There is a hawthorn hedge at the edge. The Red one
berries are still there here and there. Lexmond says that she also wants to investigate
how the landscape elements are used by the different species.
“Do they only function as a transit route, or also as a habitat?”
We come to a pool with a collar of reeds on one side. The pool is dry. While
Autumn is almost over. The Crown is shocked. “I had this a few years ago
still saw great crested newts” That drought is a sign of climate change, he says.
The Rhine and its extension, the Waal, are changing from a river that partly flows through
melting snow is fed into a river that only receives rainwater. The
summers become drier, and then the river withdraws water from its surroundings. "That will be
a huge, extra challenge”
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/08/moderne-landbouw-is-funest-voor-biodiversiteit-maar-niet-in-de-ooijpolder-daar-fladderen-de-vlinders-af- and-on-.... 5/6
 12/10/22, 10:09 AM Modern agriculture is disastrous for biodiversity. But not in the Ooijpolder, where the butterflies flutter back and forth - NRC
A version of this article also appeared in the December 9, 2022 newspaper
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2022/12/08/moderne-landbouw-is-funest-voor-biodiversiteit-maar-niet-in-de-ooijpolder-daar-fladderen-de-vlinders-af- and-on-.... 6/6
